The Project Gutenberg EBook of Five Lectures on Blindness, by Kate M. Foley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Five Lectures on Blindness

Author: Kate M. Foley

Release Date: July 30, 2007 [EBook #22170]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIVE LECTURES ON BLINDNESS ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Janet Blenkinship and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)







CALIFORNIA STATE LIBRARY


  FIVE LECTURES

  ON

  BLINDNESS


  By

  KATE M. FOLEY

  Home Teacher of the Blind California State Library


  CALIFORNIA STATE PRINTING OFFICE SACRAMENTO 1919

  Copyright 1919 By the California State Library.




  CONTENTS


  PHOTOGRAPH                                                          4

  FOREWORD                                                            5

  THE PSYCHOLOGY OF BLINDNESS                                         6

  THE BLIND CHILD AND ITS DEVELOPMENT                                14

  THE RE-EDUCATION OF THE BLIND ADULT                                23

  THE ATTITUDE OF THE PUBLIC TOWARD THE BLIND                        32

  PREVENTION OF BLINDNESS AND CONSERVATION OF VISION
    IN ADULTS AND CHILDREN                                           40




       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Miss Foley teaching a class of men at the Industrial Home
for the Adult Blind, Oakland, California.]

       *       *       *       *       *




FOREWORD.


The following lectures were written primarily to be delivered at the
summer sessions of the University of California, at Berkeley and at Los
Angeles, in the summer of 1918. We are printing them, however, so that
the information in them can be more widely distributed, since they are
the outgrowth of almost a quarter of a century spent in work for the
blind, and were written from the standpoint of a blind person, seeking
to better the condition of the blind. They were addressed not to the
blind, but to the seeing public, for the benefit that will accrue to the
blind from a better understanding of their problems.

The successful work of Miss Foley as a student in the California School
for the Blind, as a volunteer teacher, and in recent years as home
teacher for the California State Library, makes these lectures
particularly important and authoritative.


MILTON J. FERGUSON,
State Librarian.





THE PSYCHOLOGY OF BLINDNESS.


In view of the widespread interest now manifested in the blind and their
problems--an interest deepened by reports from the warring countries--I
feel that a knowledge of the psychology of blindness should prove of
great help to those wishing to take part in the re-education of the
war-blinded soldiers.

As early as 1773, Diderot wrote an essay on the psychology of blindness,
and, as this essay was written at the very beginning of blind education,
it is interesting to note that his ideas coincide with the most advanced
deductions on the subject today. However, as these deductions are not
very numerous, and as the available literature is very scant, I shall be
obliged to draw largely from my own experience and that of other blind
persons, in presenting the subject to you.

First, let us consider the subject from the point of view of one who has
been blind from early infancy, whose fingers are his eyes, and whose
mental vision enables him to see many things not revealed by physical
sight. A blind man once said, when asked if he would not be glad to have
his eyesight, "to improve the organs I have, would be as good as to give
me that which is wanting in me." This sentence sums up the whole aim of
blind education. Dr. Eichholtz, a noted educator of the blind, says:
"Education of the blind absolutely fails in its object, in so far as it
fails to develop the remaining faculties to compensate for the want of
sight." "Touch and sight must be developed by means which practically in
all respects are dissimilar. A blind man discerns the sensation from the
real presence of an object at his fingers' end, only by the force or
weakness of that very sensation." So, then, let us consider that, to the
blind, fingers are eyes, and remember that they have ten instead of two.
As I have been blind since early infancy, my own case offers an
illustration in point, so I hope you will not misunderstand the
predominance of the personal note in these observations.

Blindness does not lead to any refinement of the senses of touch,
hearing or smell, but to a greater keenness in the interpretation of the
information furnished by these senses. Diderot says, "the help which our
senses reciprocally afford to each other, hinders their improvement,"
and so the person in possession of all the senses regards the blind man
as a marvel of intelligence and skill, just because, on losing his
eyesight, his remaining senses come to the rescue, and he continues to
live and move and have his being without the most precious of all
physical senses. In the world of the blind child eyesight plays no part,
and so the other senses are made to do double duty, and the extent to
which these may be cultivated is limited only by the mentality of the
child, its early training and environment.

I think hearing is the first sense to be cultivated, both in the infant
and the adult suddenly deprived of eyesight. Through its ears, the child
recognizes voices, detects different footfalls, is enabled to measure
distance with a fair degree of accuracy, and can form a very clear idea
as to the shape and dimensions of a room. All this information is
conveyed to the normal child through the eyes. Dr. Illingworth, a noted
educator of the blind in England, says: "Of course, there is no doubt
that blindness tends to a higher and more perfect development of the
sense of hearing, even in the uneducated, on the same principle that
Nature almost always comes to the aid of her children in providing
protective agencies of one kind or another, even in the very lowest
organisms, and, naturally, for those who are blind, the sense of hearing
is the first to fall back upon for this purpose. Thus it becomes more
highly developed, because there is more frequent call upon, and exercise
of, that sense." Another writer has said, "but a distinction should be
made between sensitiveness and an ability to use the sense, between
native sensory capacity of the sense organ, and the acquired ability to
use that capacity."

The second sense to be developed in the blind child is that of touch,
and this development begins at a very early date, supplementing the
sense of hearing. Long before the child is old enough to read, its
fingers have become its eyes, and each of the ten fingers carries its
quota of information to the active brain, the amount and quality of this
information increasing with the mental development. In addition to the
fingers, the nerves of the face and those of the feet contribute their
share of information. The child learns to detect differences in climatic
condition by the feel of the air on its face. I have often heard very
young blind children exclaim, "It feels like rain! It feels like a nice
day! The air feels heavy! The wind feels soft! The wind is rough today!"
The nerves of the feet contribute their share of helpful knowledge,
calling attention to differences in the ground often unnoticed by the
eye, telling whether the path is smooth or rough, grass-grown or
rock-strewn. The auditory and pedal nerves are mutually helpful, the ear
recording and classifying the sounds made by the feet, often guiding
them aright by recalling certain peculiarities of sound--whether the
ground is hollow, whether the sidewalk is of board or cement, and
whether there is a depression here or a raised place there. I often
wonder how deaf-blind people walk as well as they do, when they can not
hear their footfalls. I find walking much more difficult when on a
crowded thoroughfare, or when passing a planing mill or boiler factory.

The last of the trio of senses whose development compensates in large
measure for the want of eyesight, is that of smell. Through this sense,
the child comes very close to the heart of Nature. Of course, the ear is
charmed by the song of birds, the hum of insects, the murmur of wind in
the trees, or the sound of mighty waters. Through the finger-tips, he
learns the shape and size of each flower and shrub and tree, traces the
delicate pattern of ferns, notes wonderful rock formations, and finds
the first blade of tender grass coaxed to the surface by the warmth of
the Spring sunshine. But all this does not bring him the keen pleasure
he experiences when he inhales the fragrance of the rose, the perfume of
flowers with the dew still upon them, the smell of the freshly turned
earth, the newly cut grass, or the blossom laden trees. In the case of
Helen Keller, the olfactory nerves have been cultivated to a very high
degree, and through this sense she is often able to recognize her
friends. A little blind boy once told me that each member of his family
had a distinct odor, by which he could tell things worn by them, or
books they had handled. Laura Bridgeman is said to have selected the
laundry of the pupils in her school by this unusual process. I
frequently astonish my friends by telling them when I pass a drug store
or hospital, a grocery, a confectioner's, or drygoods store, a paint
shop, a florist's stand, or a livery stable. I do not think the blind
have a keener sense of taste than any other class of people, although
this claim is often made, even by the blind themselves.

We have, then, the senses of hearing, touch and smell, each playing its
part in the development of the blind child, and each playing it so well
that the lack of eyesight is not keenly felt in early childhood. Not
until it is old enough to understand the thoughtless remarks of
well-meaning people, to catch the pitying tone, to feel the
compassionate touch, does it realize that this lack of eyesight is to
prove an almost insurmountable barrier to its future success.

I was in my sixth year before I understood the meaning of the word
"blind." Up to that time, I had romped and played with other children,
climbed trees, jumped ditches, accepting bumps and bruises as part of
the game, and having no sense of fear, since some child always held my
hand. In fact, in those days, all the children held each other's hands,
and it was easier going, so. Is it not a pity that, in later life, we
feel so self-reliant we are unwilling to admit that the way could often
be made easier if we resorted to the childish game of holding hands, and
moved forward together as we faced the more serious struggles of life.
My first realization of the meaning of blindness came when, one day,
after hearing some people call me "poor child," and expressing their
sympathy to my mother, I asked if we were very poor, poorer than my
playmates, and why I could not go to school. My mother explained that we
were no poorer than the others, that the ladies did not mean it in that
way, but were sorry that I could not see and did not think I could ever
go to school. But my mother assured me that I was going to school, and
that there I would learn to see with my fingers, better than the ladies
did with their eyes. My childish mind was aroused then, and I asked
every one what it meant to see, and soon realized that I did not know
what "seeing" really was, at least, not in the sense the other children
used the word. I was filled with wonder, since my world had hitherto
seemed so complete--I heard things, or felt things, or smelled things,
and was satisfied--and yet there was another medium of knowledge
entirely unknown to me, and until then unnecessary. How eagerly I looked
forward to the time when I should learn to see and my heart was filled
with childish rapture on the day when I entered the school for the blind
at Berkeley. My first question, on meeting the Superintendent, was, "are
you going to teach me to see?" How well he performed this task, how
wisely he guided my childish feet, how carefully he developed my eager
mind, stimulated my ambition, and renewed my faltering courage, I did
not realize until I was called upon to face life, with its trials and
opportunities. And here, where his work is so well known, I wish to pay
my tribute of love and gratitude to Dr. Warring Wilkinson. He was my
great-hearted, great-souled teacher, father and friend.

When I found myself in a place with children some of whom were, like
myself, blind from infancy, and others whose eyesight had been lost
through various accidents, and yet others who could see to go about, to
tell the color of our ribbons, and advise us of the approach of a matron
or teacher my wonder grew apace. This process of learning to see was
varied and absorbing, but I soon found that it had its limitations, and
that, after all, eyes were very useful possessions, and without them I
could know nothing of color, could not picture the sky, or any of the
heavenly bodies; nor could I distinguish different people, unless I
heard their voices or steps, though no two had faces alike. I found,
too, that some children who could see colors, could not recognize faces,
and I came to realize that vision, however slight, was greatly to be
desired. I could distinguish light from darkness, and this enabled me to
locate doors and windows; but color, with its varying shades, was then,
and is now, a mystery profound. But in my desire to see, to be just like
other children, I resolved to learn all I could about color, and so I
memorized the list of colors, which ones harmonized, which were most
pleasing to the eye, which were bright, which produced a sombre
impression. Thus I soon learned to speak of color with a degree of
intelligence, and to select my gowns with a view to pleasing the eyes of
my friends. I soon learned to associate certain phrases with certain
colors--for instance, blue as the sky, green as grass, yellow as gold,
black as night, red as fire, and brown as a berry. I also learned that a
color had a variety of shades, and that at times colors were changeable,
it being difficult to distinguish blue from green at night. The sky,
with its starred phenomena, was even harder to conceive, and I could not
understand how clouds obscured the sun, or how old Sol could put the
blackest clouds to rout.

My ears and fingers continued to flood my mind with knowledge, and the
want of eyesight did not distress me. When I touched an object, or
listened to a lesson, my mind stored it away for future reference, and
often now, when recalling some facts in history or geography, I can hear
the voice of the teacher who read the particular passage.

I was eight years old when I first examined a horse, although I was
familiar with the sound of its feet on the pavement, and knew whether it
walked, trotted or galloped. The horse I examined had been driven a long
distance, and so was very warm; when my hand was placed upon its mane,
the hair was damp and clung to the back, and there was an odor of
steaming flesh. A fly was tormenting the animal, and, as it tossed its
head impatiently, I could hear the rattle of harness, and the sound of
its restive foot upon the ground. These impressions have always remained
with me. My knowledge of the horse was acquired through the senses of
hearing, touch and smell. And so with the cow. I can hear its low "moo,
moo," hear the milk dropping into the pail, feel the hard outer shell of
the horns, and catch the odor that is ever present in the cow's domain.
The cat and dog have their peculiarities, too--the mewing of the cat,
and the sounds heard when it purrs while washing its face--the dog's
quick bark, and the sound it makes when panting for breath, as it rests
after a long chase. I know the animals have different colors, peculiar
to them, but this knowledge has no place in my mental conception of
them.

In judging people, the voice is my infallible guide. I am instantly
attracted or repelled by a voice, and my estimate of character is rarely
incorrect. By the voice I am able to form a very accurate idea as to
height, weight and age, so here again I do not feel the lack of
eyesight. The voice is an unfailing index to character, and the trained
ear is quick to catch the slightest variation in tone, and can detect
traits and moods hidden from the eye, because not registered upon the
face. There is a strong voice, a brave voice, a voice full of hope and
cheer; a tired voice, a crafty voice, a voice full of dull despair. And
so here again I do not feel the lack of eyesight in noting differences
in my fellow men. I know that there are distinguishing marks, that
heads are shaped differently, and that hair and eyes have different
colors, corresponding to the various types, as blondes or brunettes. All
this I know abstractly, but it is just one of the bits of information
tucked away in memory's storehouse. I do not suppose many of you have
ever heard a smile. I have. I hear a smile almost before the lips can
register it, and to me the sound is as musical as the laughter of a very
young child. I think hearing a smile must be like seeing the light in
the eyes, and so lack of eyesight is no deprivation in this connection.

All during my days at school, I went on acquiring knowledge, learning to
see many things, scarcely realizing the handicap of blindness, because
every help was given me, and I was surrounded by those whose condition
was like my own. But when I went out into the world, I found that many
seeing people, so called, had very little vision, although their
eyesight was perfect. I found, too, that, although I knew many things,
and was well equipped to earn my own living, my lack of eyesight was
responsible for a corresponding lack of confidence upon the part of the
public. This was a great disappointment, for I knew I could succeed, if
only some one would give me the opportunity. After waiting twenty years,
the State Library gave me the opportunity. This lack of confidence upon
the part of the public is one of the most depressing features of adult
blindness. Thus far, I have considered the subject from the point of
view of one who has been blind from early infancy, but now I shall view
it from the standpoint of one deprived of eyesight in adult life, who is
taking his first step in the dark.

M. Diderot says: "The help which the senses reciprocally afford to each
other hinders their improvement," and so the adult whose movements are
no longer directed by his eyes, feels utterly helpless and bewildered,
as one who finds himself on a strange road, very late at night, with no
ray of light to guide him. As the blinded soldier is uppermost in our
thought today, I am considering the mental condition of an adult
suddenly deprived of eyesight, not that of the man whose blindness has
come on gradually.

The first sensation when thus plunged into total darkness is that of
unreality, and, just as the light of day dispels the gloom of night, so
the sufferer clings to the hope that any minute he may open his eyes,
and find things as they were before the darkness settled down, with all
its weird shadows, to fill his soul with dread. The continued darkness
causes a feeling of depression and repression, very hard to combat, and
so the sufferer is in need of "first aid"--in need of a friendly hand
and a cheery voice to help him through these trying days. Of this
period, M. Brieux, Director of Re-education of the Blinded Soldiers in
Paris, says: "The blind are, for the time being, put back into the
helpless condition of children. They have to be sustained and given a
new education for life. They have to begin many things all over again.
Spiritually, they have lost their bearings, and are drifting about in
restless anguish. Physically, their whole organism has been shaken by
the wound they have received, and must have time after such a violent
shock to recover its equilibrium. Their power of judgment has often been
temporarily destroyed. They are weak in body and uncertain in mind. This
double weakness lays on those who surround them a double duty. Much will
have been done when their material welfare has been assured, but the
responsibility will not have been discharged unless they have also
attained to tranquility of soul and a sense of their own dignity. One
must have confidence, in order to give them confidence. Most of us have
no idea what powers to meet new demands are inherent in our organs. We
have within us capacities unknown even to ourselves, inactive, so long
as they are not necessary, awake and efficient, as soon as there is need
of them. They are reserves which most of the time we never call on. They
are a hoard which we do not touch. Our resources and our power of life
are greater than we imagine. The sudden loss of sight gives, after a
time, something like the lash of a whip to the whole organism. All the
other senses are roused to greater sharpness. When the blind soldier
fully realizes this, he will perhaps arrive at a state in which I have
seen some men blind from birth, the state of being proud of being blind.
Why should they not be proud, when they feel that they are as capable of
accomplishing certain things, of practicing certain trades as other men?
If, with their lessened powers, lacking the power that we consider of
supreme importance, they can do things as well as we, are they not,
therefore, cleverer than we? Instead of talking to them of resignation,
incite them to revolt at the limitations of their condition. Inspire
them to conquer circumstances. Insist that they can. Picture life to
them, its beauty and its power, and tell them that it is good."

In administering to the needs of this readjustment period, the volunteer
should be an optimist, and should exercise common sense in guiding the
adult over the first lap of the unfamiliar road. I have advised the
volunteers who are now in France, and those preparing to go there, to
take writing boards, games, bright, pithy stories, and a lot of nonsense
verse. I have told these Red Cross workers that they themselves must
know how to laugh, must be able to rise above the horrors about them,
for they are there to serve heroes, not cowards, heroes who will laugh
with a sob in their throats; heroes who, after a short respite, will
reach for a new sword with which to resume the battle of life. God grant
we may have the new swords ready for them--swords of hope, swords of
confidence, swords from which all the old prejudice and misconception
have been removed--swords of occupation and independence!

Of this readjustment period, Clarence Hawkes, the well-known blind
naturalist who lost his eyesight at the age of fifteen, says: "the loss
of eyesight seems, for a time, to upset the perfect working of the
nervous system. The nerves have to adjust themselves to new conditions,
and rearrange the channels of communication. On first losing one's
eyesight, one is impressed with the fact that all noises sound much too
loud, and it takes several months for sounds to get toned down to their
normal volume, and one never quite overcomes the tendency to jump at
sudden sharp noises."

As to the blind child the senses of touch, hearing and smell prove
efficient carriers of knowledge, so these senses come to the rescue of
the blind adult, and compensate, in large measure, for the loss of
eyesight. Training does not increase the sensitiveness of a sense organ.
It merely puts this capacity to better use. So the blind adult does not
suddenly come into possession of wonderful powers, but, in time, his
"acquired sense perception" enables him to do many things hitherto
considered impossible of accomplishment. But to the casual observer,
anything done without eyesight is considered little short of marvelous.
The adult soon learns to recognize voices and footsteps, to measure
distance with a fair degree of accuracy, and, in many cases, to go about
alone, with only the friendly cane for company. Many of the blind have
what is defined as a "sense of obstacles," and it is sometimes called a
sixth sense. Dr. Illingworth defines this sense as "an exceedingly
subtle kind of instinct that enables a blind individual to detect the
presence or proximity of a person or object under circumstances of
absolute silence, and very often to know the nature of the object." Dr.
Illingworth believes that this remarkable power is of electric origin
and latent in everybody. This power seems to have its seat in the nerves
of the face, and is possessed by the blind adult as well as the blind
child. This sense of obstacles, this "touch at a distance," enables a
person to tell when he is passing tall buildings, fences, trees, and
many other obstructions. Mr. Hawkes says: "The sixth sense, if such it
be, probably depends upon three conditions--sound, the compression of
the air, and whether the face be free to use its sensitive feelers. This
subject is still in its infancy, and time may reveal many interesting
facts concerning it; but for our purpose it is enough that the blind
have a sense of obstacles, and let us regard it as another proof that we
are wonderfully made and divinely led."

In a surprisingly short time, the blind adult becomes accustomed to the
new conditions, the various organs perform their new functions, and he
finds life in sightless land to be, in many respects, very like life in
that world of light and color, now only a memory. But a very living
memory--enabling him to recall the faces of his friends, the glow of
sunset, or the rosy light of dawn with the eye of the mind whose vision
is keener, clearer than mere physical sight. This ability to call up
mental pictures is yet another of the compensations, and these pictures
never fade, but come, when familiar scenes or objects are suggested. The
adult is deeply interested in form and color, and likes to have them
minutely described. This fact is not well understood by sighted friends,
and so the blind are often deprived of details which would give them
keenest pleasure, because friends fear to recall painful memories. In
this connection, and by way of conclusion, I shall give a poem written
by one of our pupils, who lost his eyes when a drummer boy in the Civil
War. This man learned to read raised type after being blind fifty-three
years. His poem follows:

    A BLIND MAN'S SOLILOQUY.

    What, then, is blindness? This and nothing more:
    The window blinds are closed, the outer door
    Close shut and bolted, and the curtains drawn.
    No more comes light of stars nor morning's dawn,
    Nor one lone ray from day's meridian light.
    And men pass by and say "within is night!"
    Not so; for Memory's lamp, with steady blaze,
    Shines on the hallowed scenes of other days,
    While Fancy's torch, prophetic, flashing through
    The vistas of the future, brings to view
    Scenes passing strange, but scenes that yet shall be,
    Which I can see, but which he can not see
    Whose dazzled orbs find nothing hid away
    Beyond the brilliant margin of today.

    To me the radiant world forever gleams
    With the rich halo of my boyish dreams;
    The faces I have loved no wrinkles know;
    My dear ones' eyes ne'er lose their cherished glow;
    The hair of gold ne'er turns to silver hair;
    The young are young, the fair are always fair.

    With reason strengthened, feelings more intense,
    The senses, multiples of former sense,
    Vicarious servants for dead sight become.
    I see the city in the city's hum;
    I catch its subtle undertone of trade;
    I hear of fortunes lost and fortunes made,
    In sounds to him a mystery profound
    Who, seeing, knows not vision muffles sound.
    Distinct to him must sound become, to whom
    Life walks in darkness--call it not in gloom.
    'Tis only an exchange of good for good,
    A new plant growing where the old one stood,
    Old blessings taken, and new blessings given;
    Sweet compensation, thou wert born in heaven!

    There is not silence unto him whose soul
    In darkness sits and listens. Like a scroll
    On which the secrets of the world are traced,
    Blindness is but a sea-shell kindly placed
    Beside the ear, and in its varying tone,
    Who will, may make life's secret all his own.
    And thus misfortunes bless, for blindness brings
    A power to pierce the depths of hidden things,
    To walk where reason and fair fancy lead,
    To read the riddle of men's thoughts, to read
    The soul's arcana in each subtler tone,
    And make man's joys and sorrows all my own.

    Nor can I sit repining at my lot
    As bitter or unjust, or curse the shot
    Which tore away my sight. The world is kind
    And gentle to her sons. Though I am blind,
    Smooth paths of enterprise have always stood
    Open for me, and, doing what I could,
    With hand or brain, with simple earnestness,
    Have gathered what was due me of success.

    O you, who sit in darkness, moaning o'er
    Your dead and vanished vision, mourn no more!
    Keep in the current. Be you brave and strong!
    The busy world is singing--join the song,
    And you shall find, if you no duty shirk,
    Who will may prosper, if he do but work.

And as a last thought, permit me to quote the concluding words of
Clarence Hawkes' wonderful book, "Hitting the Dark Trail": "If night has
overtaken me at noonday, yet have I found beauty in night. The sun at
noontide showed me the world and all its wonder but the night has shown
me the universe, the countless stars and illimitable spaces, the
vastness and the wonder of all life. The perfect day only showed me
man's world, but the night showed me God's Universe."




THE BLIND CHILD AND ITS DEVELOPMENT.


As a foreword to this lecture, I shall quote from a paper entitled
"Blind Children And How To Care For Them," written by Dr. F. Park Lewis,
an eminent oculist of New York City, and a man who has devoted much time
and thought to the blind and their needs.

Dr. Lewis says: "It is the mind and the spirit which control, and when
these are great, they dominate and rise superior to mere physical
deficiencies. The inspiration of great ideals must be held out to the
blind, even more than to the seeing, from the very beginning. It is not
enough that the blind man or woman shall have physical strength, but his
training must be so well balanced as to give him poise as well as vigor.
It does not suffice that the blind man shall be as well educated as his
fellow who sees. Handicapped by the loss of the most important of his
special senses, he must supplement this deficiency by a better training
of his mind and body. It is not enough that he should have the good
character of the average man. His word and his reputation should be
beyond question. He should be independent, and proudly unwilling, except
when absolutely necessary, to accept that for which he can not, in some
way, return an equivalent. He must be taught to reason with clearness
and logical precision, for he must succeed by the aid of his mentality
and character, rather than by his manual exertions. These facts are
emphasized here, because if such qualities are to be secured, the
training which produces them should begin in the cradle." If I could
bring it about, a copy of the foregoing lines should be framed and
placed on the desk of every teacher of blind children, and such teachers
requested to read these words at least once each day.

In considering the development of the blind child, we must recognize the
fact that, in mental attainment, at least, he is the peer of the child
who sees. But in order to bring this about, the early years of the child
must be carefully supervised, and his training calculated to fit him for
the tremendous task awaiting him, a task requiring the courage of a
Spartan, the wisdom of Solomon, and the patience of Job. Unfortunately,
the parents of blind children rarely understand the importance of this
early training. They are too often too absorbed in their own sorrow at
having a child so afflicted, too sure that loss of eyesight means loss
of mental vigor, to realize that their own attitude, their own
self-pity, may prove a greater handicap to the child than blindness
itself. If a child lives in a house where he is waited upon, and made to
feel that mere existence and the ability to eat and sleep are all that
may reasonably be expected of him, and that he must depend upon his
family for everything, he will grow up helpless, selfish and awkward,
and no amount of later training will entirely counteract the pernicious
effect produced in these early, formative years. When placed in school
with other children, he will be very sensitive to correction, and may
become morbid and unhappy, thus giving a wrong impression of the blind
in general. If, on the other hand, the child is taught to be
self-helpful, permitted to join in the work and play of other children,
made to feel that, with greater effort, he may do just what they do, he
will soon become cheerfully alert and hopefully alive to all the
possibilities of his peculiar position. It is true that natural
disposition has much to do with one's outlook on life, but cheerfulness
and a certain form of stoicism may be cultivated, and to the blind child
these qualities are absolutely essential if he is to attain any measure
of success in later life. It would be foolish for me to ignore the
difficulties and limitations in the path of everyone deprived of
eyesight, either in infancy or adult life, but I know that these very
limitations and difficulties may aid in forming a character whose quiet
strength and unfaltering courage can not fail to win the admiration and
co-operation of all who witness its tireless efforts for success. But in
order to achieve success, let me repeat that such training must begin at
the earliest possible date.

You may never have thought of it, but the blind child has no model, no
pattern. It must acquire everything. It learns nothing by imitation. The
normal child copies the gestures and mannerisms of its parents, and so
learns many things unconsciously, and with little or no instruction. But
the blind child must be taught to smile, to shake hands, to hold up its
head, to walk properly, to present and receive objects, and the thousand
and one details of daily living so naturally acquired under ordinary
conditions. Long before it has reached school age, the blind child
should be permitted to romp with other children, to take bumps and
bruises as part of the game, and should be encouraged to run, jump rope,
and join in all harmless sports, thus acquiring that freedom of
movement, muscular co-ordination, and fearless bearing, so necessary if
he is to cope successfully with the difficulties awaiting him. His toys
should be chosen to instruct as well as amuse, and in this way he should
be made familiar with the different forms, the square, the circle, the
oblong, the triangle and the pyramid. The Goddard form board and
Montessori insets are invaluable at this period. He should be trained to
recognize the difference between smooth and rough, soft and hard, light
and heavy, thick and thin. He should be given plasticine or clay with
which to model, and be urged to reproduce his toys, thus assisting in
the muscular development and intelligent use of his fingers--another
essential equipment. As soon as possible, the process of dressing should
be taught. The child may learn this more readily if a doll is used as a
model, and he is required to put on its clothes each morning, and remove
them just before his own bedtime. This important process should be made
as interesting as possible, and each successful effort greeted
enthusiastically, each failure carefully pointed out, its cause
discovered, and its repetition prevented, when possible. In this way he
acquires system, learns to put his clothes away in a certain place, and
to locate them again without assistance. His little fingers should be
kept constantly employed stringing beads, putting pegs in a wooden
board, cutting paper with kindergarten scissors, and modelling with
plasticine. If thus occupied, he will escape the mannerisms peculiar to
the blind child whose only amusement has been to put his fingers in his
eyes, shake his hand before his face to see the shadow, rock his body
back and forth, and whirl around in dizzy circles. I found just such a
child, a girl of eight years, who had never done anything for herself,
and whose parents refused to send her to school. It took me some time to
win the child's confidence, but when I did, I had no trouble to correct
many of her habits, and I soon taught her to dress herself and learn to
read. When I asked her what she did all day before I brought her the
beads and the little scissors, and she answered, "Oh, I just sat in my
rocker, and rocked back and forth, shaking my hands." And when I asked
why she did not play and act like other children, she began to cry, and
said, "Nobody never told me nothin' else to do till you came."

When six years old, a blind child should be sent to the nearest state
school for the blind, or to a special class, if there is such a
department in the public schools of the city in which it lives. The
necessity of sending the child to school thus early can not be too
strongly emphasized, and education of blind children should be made
compulsory, just as in the case of ordinary children. This is a measure
which should be considered by all those interested in child welfare. The
unwillingness of parents to send their children away to boarding school
at so early an age is one of the strongest arguments in favor of the
special classes in public schools. But it is not possible to have such
classes in the small cities and towns, and very often the home
conditions are often unsuitable for the proper development of a blind
child, and so, in every state, a residential school is an absolute
necessity.

Such a school should consist of a kindergarten, primary, intermediate
and high school department, and the life of the children should conform
as closely as possible to that of a large family in a well-ordered home.
Those in charge of the children should be impressed with the
responsibility of the task they have undertaken and should do their
utmost to assist in the work of fitting the little ones for the
preliminary skirmish in the battle of life. All children should have
constant supervision during the formative period, but more especially
does the blind child need watchful guidance in his work and at his play.
Little habits must be broken, awkward movements discouraged, self
confidence fostered, and every effort made to develop the child along
sane and normal lines, so that, in later life, he may have the poise and
bearing so often lacking in those who are blind from early childhood.

It is sometimes claimed that it is not essential that a teacher of the
blind be possessed of more than an ordinary education, and this is why
so many schools for the blind fail to turn out capable, cultured,
self-reliant boys and girls. Dr. Illingworth, the noted English
educator, gives the following qualifications for a teacher of the blind:
"a sound education, self-control in a high degree, a boundless
enthusiasm, a determination to succeed, should be kind and sympathetic,
and at the same time firm, and should be true to his word." These are
qualifications which should be possessed alike by the blind teacher and
sighted teacher, and only teachers so qualified should be entrusted with
the divine privilege of bringing light to the minds of these helpless
little ones. I wish to add a few more qualifications to Dr.
Illingworth's list, and they are these: a broad, comprehending sympathy,
a sense of humor, and a heart brimming with love for all children--a
heart capable of sharing the joy and grief of every child heart. And I
wish to emphasize, in a special manner, one of the doctor's
qualifications--namely, "a boundless enthusiasm," and to add yet
another, a living, breathing faith that teaching is a divine calling,
and that the opportunities for good or ill are limitless. To be
successful, a teacher should be able to bring himself to the level of
his pupil. I once heard a man say of a great teacher, "he had the heart
of a boy, and understood our every thought and feeling."

In many schools for the blind the inspirational value of a blind teacher
is overlooked or ignored. In this connection Dr. Illingworth says: "it
is almost as impossible for a seeing teacher to realize what it is to be
blind, and know all the difficulties of his blind pupil, as for a
congenitally blind person to enter into and share with one who can see,
the beauty of a glorious picture or landscape." Dr. Illingworth
continues, "it takes a seeing teacher to become what might be called a
naturalized blind person, that is, one able to see things from the blind
point of view; though he is never in the favorable position of a blind
teacher who can say to a child, 'do it so; I can do it--I am blind like
you.'" In the residential schools Dr. Illingworth recommends that the
ratio of blind teachers to seeing should be one to two. He says, "their
very presence is a continual inspiration and incentive to the pupils,"
and he adds, "the education of blind children in those subjects in which
the methods of instruction are necessarily and essentially totally
different from those of the seeing, is best in the hands of a properly
qualified blind teacher." The wisdom of this recommendation is
recognized in the largest schools of England and France, and some of
them have blind superintendents as well. America is slower to recognize
the ability of the blind, but this period of reconstruction and
readjustment through which we are passing may quicken their sense of the
importance of employing blind teachers and superintendents, whenever
possible. Superintendents are no longer required to perform clerical
work. All these details are left to stenographers and bookkeepers.
Neither is the superintendent expected to teach. But he should be a
scholar, a man of culture, with broad vision and high ideals, and with a
sympathetic knowledge of the difficulties to be met and overcome by the
students in his care. It should be the aim of the residential school to
train its pupils along lines best suited to their individual needs, and,
when possible, to fit them to become partially self-supporting, if not
wholly so.

The child in a residential school knows very little of life outside the
buildings, knows little of the trials and struggles going on in its own
home, perhaps. Its days are well ordered. It is clothed and fed, and is
not expected to practice self-denial or to exercise any of the qualities
of courage or fortitude which the exigencies of later life demand.
Clarence Hawkes says: "courage a blind person should have above
everything else. He must be literally steeped in it. It will not do to
have just the ordinary, temporary supply allotted to the average seeing
man--he will run out in a single day. But he must have courage that is
perennial, a ceaseless fount of it--courage for the morning, courage for
the noonday, and courage for the evening. Life is a battle and a
struggle which never ends. He must fight for hope and cheer, laughter
and happiness, every inch of the way along life's path." Another writer
has said, "courage is the standing army of the soul, keeping it from
conquest, pillage and slavery." But the child in the residential school
knows little of all this, has little occasion to know. Dr. Park Lewis
says: "The added importance of having blind children educated with those
who see is, that they may realize more keenly the real difficulties of
life which are to be met, and which have to be overcome. They will not
always find kindness and courtesy, and they must be prepared to adjust
themselves to the harder conditions when they arise."

When the child finishes the required curriculum of the residential
school, and goes forth to his place in the world, he is often unprepared
for the struggle, unable to adjust himself to the altered conditions,
lacking in patience, perseverance and pluck; the "three P's" of which
Clarence Hawkes so often speaks, and without which he claims no blind
person can successfully overcome his handicap. The need for this
preparation is better known to a blind teacher or superintendent, and
for that reason, if for no other, his presence in the school is
desirable. He knows the value of higher education to the blind, and he
will urge the pupils to fit themselves for college, reminding them that
blindness is a physical, not a mental, handicap. And who is better
qualified to fire the youthful mind, to strengthen the wavering
ambition, and arouse the latent enthusiasm, than one who has made the
effort, has fought the fight, and won gloriously!

Although Dr. Warring Wilkinson, who was Superintendent of the California
School for the Blind for over forty years, and his brother Charles, who
taught for the same period--although neither of these men was blind,
they were true teachers and college men, and understood the value of
scholastic attainment to the blind. As far back as I can remember, they
urged us all to prepare for college, and, to stimulate this desire, they
kept in close touch with the work of the university, and often brought
essays written by the advanced students, to encourage us in our literary
efforts, assuring us with a little practice we could write as well.
Often, too, they would take classes to hear a lecture on some subject
under discussion, thus forging the first link between the school and the
university, in whose shadow our young lives were spent. In preparing us
for competition with seeing students, Mr. Charles Wilkinson used to say:
"never ask for quarter because of your blindness. Do your work so well
that people will say not, 'how wonderful this is considering your
affliction,' but 'how perfect in spite of it!'" This thought has
remained constantly with me, strengthening and encouraging me, enabling
me to overcome difficulties that would otherwise have been impossible to
surmount.

It is of vital importance that the blind should have pleasant,
well-modulated voices, and for this reason elocution should be included
in the course of study. In recent years a number of blind students in
eastern schools have been trained as readers and public entertainers, a
line of work in which eyesight is not an essential factor. Reading aloud
should be encouraged among the pupils, and frequent speed tests given,
thus stimulating in them a desire for reading.

The school at Berkeley has included business methods in its course of
study, and this is an excellent thing, because the day is not far
distant when the ability of the blind to fill positions as typewriters,
stenographers, telephone and dictaphone operators, and salesmen, will be
recognized. And when this time comes, let us hope that our young people
may be ready and eager to prove their worth in these lines of endeavor.
If the students are made to feel that they are blazing a trail, and
making it less difficult for others to follow, their ultimate success is
assured.

Having outlined the aim and purpose of the residential school, and shown
it to be a necessary factor in the education of the blind in every
state, I wish to call attention to some of the advantages to be derived
from coeducation of blind and seeing children.

As early as 1900 Chicago started a special class for blind children as a
part of its public school system, thus inaugurating the movement in this
country, if not in the world. Since that time many large cities,
including Boston, New York, Jersey City, Rochester, Milwaukee, Detroit,
Cleveland, Toledo, Cincinnati and Los Angeles, have started similar
classes, carrying the children from the kindergarten, through elementary
and high school, and preparing them for college. The class in Chicago
was started through the efforts of John B. Curtis, a blind teacher, and
the Superintendent of Public School classes of Cleveland, Toledo and
Cincinnati. Mr. R. B. Irwin, is a blind man, and so it is not strange
that a blind teacher of Los Angeles should be the first to recognize the
need of such a class in this state.

The State Library was glad to further this forward movement in the
education of blind children, and permitted me to devote a great deal of
time to organizing the class, and it provided the books and some of the
apparatus for carrying on the work for the first year. It still supplies
many of the books, though the Board of Education provides its own
apparatus. Dr. Albert Shiels, Superintendent of the Los Angeles City
Schools, was glad to have a class for the blind in the city, since he
has seen how successfully the work was carried on in New York, where
more than two hundred children attend special classes, and this in spite
of the fact that New York has two state schools for the blind. When the
home conditions are favorable, and a special class is available, it is
wiser to permit the blind child to remain with its parents, to attend
school each morning with its brothers and sisters. In this way there is
no break in the family relation and the child does not grow indifferent
to home ties, as so often happens when he is sent to a residential
school. Mr. Irwin says "the special class is the twentieth century
emphasis on the integrity of the home."

On January 2, 1917, the Los Angeles class started with eight pupils
enrolled, and on June 30 of this year the number had increased to
seventeen, with the prospect of more at the opening of the fall term.
Teachers for special classes are generally chosen from the regular
school department, their work being usually directed by a blind
supervisor. In pursuance of my work as home teacher I found a number of
children for whom there was no room in the State School at Berkeley, and
before the special class was organized I taught these children in their
homes or at the library. Miss Frances Blend, a grade teacher, asked to
study with me, since she wished to teach the blind here or in the East.
I sent her to teach the children, and in this way she acquired the
necessary experience, learned to read and write Braille rapidly, and
gained an insight into the psychology of the blind child, so, when the
board of education needed a teacher for the special class she was ready
and eager for the task. Since then Miss Blend's sister has qualified and
is now the second teacher in the blind department, eight to ten children
being considered all that one teacher can properly care for.

Among the poor of every large city, there are children whose parents
conceal them, for fear they may be sent away to school. These are known
as hidden children, and I found one such child tucked away under the
bed, and was told she always hid there when she heard strange voices.
She was a little Mexican girl, and spoke no English. She is now one of
the brightest children in the class, and her parents are delighted that
they need not part with her.

In the special class, the children are trained to speak intelligently of
things which they do not see with the physical sight, so that they may
be able to converse naturally upon ordinary topics, and need not have to
plead ignorance, on the ground of never having seen this or that object.
Their minds are filled with a love for all beautiful things, especially
flowers and pictures, and they are frequently taken to parks and
museums. They are told about the stars, the blue sky, sunsets, the
majesty of the ocean, and all the other wonders that enchant the eye;
and they are taught to speak of "seeing" these things, because they
really do see them with the mental vision, keener, in many instances,
than mere physical sight. The boys of the polytechnic high school made a
wonderful doll house for the children--a house of four rooms, fully
furnished throughout. The children made their own rugs and baskets,
tables and chairs, and one boy modeled a bathtub of plasticine, perfect
in design. The house has a sloping roof, and it is thatched, and I must
confess that my first real knowledge of roofs was gained from examining
that one on the doll house. It has a chimney, too, and a stovepipe, and
so the children learn a great deal from this miniature home of their
dolls.

In their special classroom, the children are taught Braille reading and
writing, and a great deal of time is given to these branches. They are
taught all sorts of handwork, basketry, weaving, knitting, modeling, and
chair caning, and, when old enough, they are sent with the other
children to sewing, cooking, sloyd and music classes. As soon as
possible, they recite with the regular classes, their lessons being
previously read or explained by the special teacher. This gives them the
contact with normal children, so necessary to the development of the
blind child. Those not in favor of special classes claim that this
competition is too severe a strain, and that it is unkind and unwise to
place blind children with those whose physical advantages and
opportunities for study are greater. But we have found that the plan
works admirably. The special teacher trains her pupils to be
self-reliant and helpful, insists that they join in the games of the
others, assuring them that, with greater effort, they, too, may play,
and it is delightful to watch them at recess or at noon, each blind
child affectionately led by a seeing child, the latter calling the
teacher's attention to the successful performance of some feat on the
part of his blind playmate. In the classroom, too, the spirit is the
same, the blind child remembering things for the one who sees, and the
seeing child using his eyes for the one who is blind. The special
teacher trains the memory of her pupils to the highest possible degree,
impressing upon them that their minds are vast storehouses in which to
keep all sorts of knowledge tucked away for future use, and that it is
disastrous to blind children to forget. In mental arithmetic, they
usually lead the class. Their presence in the school is of the greatest
help to the others with whom they work in class. Their success in
overcoming difficulties is a stimulus to the pride and an incentive to
the ambition of the seeing child. The presence of the blind children is
a constant reminder to them of their superior physical advantages, and
they are ashamed to have them outstrip them, as they so often do, in
intellectual work. And so the presence of the blind child is sure to
result in untold good, not only to the child so handicapped, but to the
entire school, removing as it must, the belief, now, alas, so general,
that when eyesight is lost, all is lost. Trained side by side with its
sighted companions, doing the same work as well, if not better, the
later success of the young blind seeker after knowledge is practically
assured; for, as I have said, in mental attainment, at least, the blind
child is the peer of the child with eyesight,--here, beyond cavil, the
chances are equal.

To my mind, the coeducation of the blind and seeing is a step in the
right direction--a very forward step, since it will ultimately bridge
the gulf of misconception and skepticism now separating these two
classes--a gulf which must be bridged if we hope to arrive at a sane and
satisfactory solution of the problem of finding employment, not only for
the returned blind soldiers, but for the thousands of intelligent blind
men and women who are waiting eagerly, hungrily, for a chance to prove
their ability, a chance to earn their daily bread. When blind and seeing
children are trained side by side, from the kindergarten, through the
grades into high school, and on to college, perhaps, the barriers
dissolve, the blind boy and the seeing boy are comrades--they have
played together, worked together, and together they have planned their
future. The seeing boy knows the blind boy will succeed because he has
seen him victorious in many a mental skirmish. Just this May, right here
in the University at Berkeley, a blind student graduated fourth in a
class of more than one thousand seeing students. It may be interesting
to note, in passing, that there are seven blind students now attending
the university, and that the state provides three hundred dollars a year
to defray the expense of a reader for each student. New York was the
first state to provide readers for blind college students, and this was
brought about through the efforts of Dr. Newel Perry, a blind graduate
of the University of California, now a teacher of mathematics in the
California School for the Blind. Dr. Newel Perry was largely
instrumental in the passage of a similar bill in this state, and so once
again, the blind are indebted to a blind teacher for advancement.

But all the children in the special classes will not care to go to
college, and for those who do not, other work will be provided, manual
training given, and all sorts of trades encouraged. Here, too, they will
have the added stimulus of studying side by side with their sighted
companions. It is my earnest hope that some day this state will
establish a technical school for the blind. In such a school, a
deft-fingered intelligent blind boy could learn electric wiring, pipe
fitting, screw fitting, bolt nutting, assembling of chandeliers and
telephone parts, trained as a plumber's helper, and taught to read gas
and electric meters, by passing the fingers over the dial--in short, a
variety of trades and occupations could be pursued with profit to the
school and to the students. But while waiting for the establishment of
such a school, there is much to be done by way of preparation. We must
prove the truth of Clarence Hawkes' assertion that "blindness is, after
all, but a 25 per cent handicap in the race of life." But it _is_ a
handicap, no matter what profession is adopted. I analyze the handicap
thus: 24 per cent of it is the prejudice and unbelief of the public, and
the other 1 per cent is the lack of eyesight. I believe this is not too
strong. In speaking of the handicap, Clarence Hawkes continues: "a blind
person, in order to succeed equally with the seeing, must put in 125 per
cent of energy before he can stand abreast of his seeing competitor."

But in order to prove blindness to be but a 25 per cent handicap, we
must train our blind children from their earliest infancy. We must not
sidetrack them. We must plant their feet firmly on the highroad of life,
encourage their first, faltering steps, teach them to go forward
fearlessly, with head erect and shoulders squared, warn them of pitfalls
and hidden thorns, show them the wisdom of making haste slowly when the
path is steep or uneven, impress upon their minds the importance to
others of their success, and, above all, train them to have confidence
in themselves, teach them to realize that, because of their struggles
and limitations, they have a mental equipment and reserve force
possessed by very few of their more fortunate fellow beings. Thus
trained and fortified, our young blind people will work like Trojans to
prove their ability to those who doubt it, and succeed in removing one
obstacle after another, until they stand ready to take equal chances
with any who may be pitted against them. The hand of the sightless
worker is steadier, and his courage greater, because of the years of
struggle and constant effort of which his sighted competitors can form
no conception.

And so those in charge of the education of the blind, whether in
residential schools or public school classes, have a herculean task
before them, but if their hearts are in the work, if they are alive to
their wonderful opportunity for service, and if they have faith in the
ability of their pupils, the future success of these handicapped young
people is practically assured. As with the nation today, so with those
interested in the welfare of the blind--we look to the children for the
fulfillment of our highest ideals, and hope, in their advancement, to
see our "dearest dreams come true." I am often called visionary, and I
am proud to confess that I have a vision, a wonderful vision of the
future of the blind. It may not be realized during my lifetime, but if
some of the children I have inspired will take up the torch, and carry
it on unfalteringly, I shall be satisfied. Meantime, I walk by the light
of my vision along rough roads, across strange streams, up hills that
are steep and rock-strewn; and, though my courage sometimes fails, and
my strength seems unequal to the task, the light shines clear and
steady, and I go forward, in the glad assurance that one day my vision
will be realized, my cherished dream for the emancipation of my people,
the emancipation of the blind, _must_ "come true."




THE RE-EDUCATION OF THE BLIND ADULT,

With Special Reference to the Blinded Soldier.

    "A voice came in the darkness
        And lifted the curtain of Mind;
    I saw that fingers could be
        Also eyes to the blind.
    I touched, I thought, I saw,
        And the dark shades rolled aside.
    And to you my heart pays tribute.
        Dear teacher, friend and guide."


These lines were sent to me by one of my blind pupils after he had
learned to read and write the Braille characters. They express the
purpose of re-education, and indicate the means by which it may be
attained. Rehabilitate, reconstruct, re-educate--these are familiar
terms in this hour of stress and world conflict. To the minds of many,
these words may present problems that are entirely new, but to the
social worker, and those whose lives have been spent in the service of
the handicapped men and women of our civil communities, the problem
presented is no new one, the only difference being that, whereas,
hitherto, only a few recognized the problem, today, stirred by the
knowledge of war and its frightful consequences, every one is eager to
share in the rehabilitation movement now sweeping over the land. The
re-education of the blinded soldier is, after all, only the re-education
of the blind adult, and he has been with us, lo, these many years! Adult
blindness has increased alarmingly in the past half century, and the
problem of providing for this unfortunate class has assumed proportions.
The prospect of having to care for thousands of blinded soldiers has led
to a consideration of the blind and their possible rehabilitation, and
much good should result from the united effort. We extend a cordial
invitation to all to "come over to Macedonia and help."

The California State Library has been engaged in the re-education of the
blind adult since it opened its Books for the Blind Department in
December, 1904. At first it supplied books to those who already knew how
to read, but soon it became evident that its field of usefulness could
extend to the adult suddenly deprived of eyesight, and not eligible to a
school for the blind. And thus the need for home teaching became
apparent long before the State Library could employ such a teacher. I
realized this need, even before leaving school, and it was my privilege
to teach as a volunteer for twenty years prior to my appointment as home
teacher for the State Library. During that period I taught the blind of
this and neighboring states, and, before books were made available by
the State Library I copied stories and poems suited to the tastes of my
individual pupils. In this way I came in close touch with the blind and
their problems, and my every waking moment was devoted to their service
and although there were

    "Heavy burdens in the load,
    And too few helpers on the road,"

I clung to the belief that some day help would come, and I should be
permitted to enlarge my scope of usefulness, and reach all who needed
re-education. And this hope was realized in July, 1914, when the State
Library asked me to accept the position of Home Teacher of the Blind of
the state.

As early as 1890 Pennsylvania started home teaching in this country, but
its work was privately maintained. Since then other states have
established such departments, Massachusetts, New York, Ohio, Illinois,
but these have special appropriations for carrying on the work. Our
State Library is doing it out of its general appropriation, and as a
phase of its extension. It is the only state library maintaining such a
department in connection with regular library work. Some of the large
cities have reading rooms in their public libraries, where books are
loaned on application, and where reading is taught to those who can go
there for lessons.

The duties of the State Library home teachers are manifold. This
department has steadily grown in importance until now it is recognized
as the very bone and sinew of work for the blind in this state. Some of
the teacher's duties are, first, to teach raised type to all who can not
see to read ordinary print, (a person need not be totally blind in order
to read in this way, as many learn who can see to go about alone):
second, to search for, and when possible, place either in the school at
Berkeley, or the special class in Los Angeles, all blind children who
have reached the age of six years; third, to conduct a campaign for the
prevention of blindness and conservation of vision in adults and
children; and, lastly, to set forth the needs of the blind, convince the
public that its attitude toward them is often an added affliction, and
correct a few of the many mistaken ideas concerning those deprived of
eyesight, who are, necessarily, somewhat handicapped in the race of
life. The importance of this last duty can not be overestimated, and so
my next lecture will present this subject in its many phases, with the
hope of creating a better understanding between the blind and the
seeing--an understanding which will not only help the blind adult now in
our midst, but aid materially in the re-education of the blinded
soldier. My task is not an easy one, but I love my work and my pupils,
and I have come to know that the public needs, not so much to be
instructed, as to be reminded.

Our first borrower was a lady of ninety years, and so we realized at
once that there was practically no age limit in this work, thus proving
the truth of the well-known saying, "we are never too old to learn." A
man of ninety, with hands toil-worn and crippled from rheumatism, was
able, after a few weeks of study, to read with pleasure, his only regret
being that he had not learned twenty years before, when blindness first
came upon him. When it is considered that, during all those years, the
man had not read a single word, his progress is truly remarkable, and
the fact that he is reading has stimulated others who, on account of
their advanced age, hesitated to study the raised types. The
requirements for study are simple--a love for reading, persistent
application, and a determination to succeed. If a person did not care to
read with his eyes, he will certainly not be willing to learn with his
fingers. This is a fact not well understood, and it is very generally
supposed that all blind people want to learn to read. Among our elderly
borrowers are doctors, judges, ministers, teachers and authors, and to
them the reading has given a new lease of life. There are invalids among
our elderly people--men and women in wheel chairs, with crippled limbs,
sometimes deprived of the use of one hand--but they are reading, and
their pleasure is beautiful to see. One woman of eighty-seven, who has
not walked for four years, and blind one year, learned to read last
January, and since that time she has read twenty books, besides knitting
squares for the Red Cross.

The type read by the elderly borrowers, and those with toil-hardened
hands, or suffering from some nervous affection, was formulated by a
blind man, Dr. William Moon, of London, about 1845, and is called Moon
type. The characters are large and distinct, many of them being shaped
like the ordinary printed letters. They are easily learned, and this
type is invaluable, not only for old people, but in cases where, in
order to restore lost confidence, a quick return is imperative. Dr. Moon
lost his eyesight in early manhood, and spent the remaining years of his
life perfecting his system, printing books and pamphlets, and going
about teaching the poor of London, thus inaugurating home teaching for
the blind. Moon type books have been printed in many languages, and
thousands of men and women have been blessed and brightened by the
unique philanthropy of this blind man. His son, Robert Moon, brought the
type to Pennsylvania, and that state and ours lead in the number of Moon
books in circulation. Often when a borrower has read Moon for six months
or a year, he is able to learn the Braille, his fingers being trained by
the Moon to remain in a proscribed space, and his confidence in their
ability fully established. This is a potent factor in mastering a dotted
system, as the progress is generally slow and laborious, especially for
elderly people.

The fact that an adult can learn to read with the fingers seems very
wonderful to the uninitiated, and, indeed, it is a long step forward,
but the ability to substitute fingers for eyes is only one of the
marvels wrought. Helen Keller has truly said that "idleness is the
greatest burden of the blind," and this is why our work with them is so
acceptable, though the reading is, after all, only the means to an end.
While training the fingers to perform their new functions, I strive to
renew hope and courage in the hearts of the pupils, assuring them that
they may still do many things that were possible before their blindness.
Self-reliance and helpfulness--minus self-pity--this is the formula I
use when urging the pupils to make the most of life; for when a man is
sorry for himself, he is on the road to despair, and his condition is
well nigh hopeless. When the pupils are able to read and write once
more, after having given up all hope of ever doing so, their confidence
is restored, and a way is opened to new and hitherto undreamed-of
possibilities. Old aims and pursuits, relinquished when the eyesight
failed, are once more remembered and discussed, and, in many instances,
resumed, thus bringing back the light, not to the eyes, but to the mind,
through work. John Newton says: "You can not shove the darkness out of a
room, but you _can_ shine it out." I see this miracle performed every
day, yet to me it is ever new, ever wonderful, stimulating me to greater
efforts for my people--because the blind _are_ my people, and their joys
and sorrows, triumphs and defeats, find an echo in my heart.

When the raised alphabet is mastered, books are sent from the State
Library to the homes, through the mail, free of cost, and thus there is
no expense incurred, and as this service is tax-supported, there is no
element of charity connected with it. At present, the State Library
employs two home teachers, and the number will be increased as the need
arises. One of these, Miss Catharine J. Morrison, is stationed at Los
Angeles, having been appointed to take my place there when I was
transferred to San Francisco last October. The arrangement for this
transfer was one of the last official acts of the late State Librarian,
my well-loved chief. Mr. Gillis was devoted to the blind, and extended
the service to this section at the earliest possible moment.

The State Library selected me as home teacher, not only because of my
years of experience with the blind, but because, blind from early
infancy, I was familiar with the handicaps and discouragements that
overwhelm the adult but recently deprived of eyesight. The pupils have
confidence in a blind teacher, because they know that every step in
their difficult path is familiar to her feet. The qualifications for a
home teacher are, briefly, these: personality, adaptability, tact, a
sense of humor, a broad, comprehending sympathy, a strongly hoping
heart, unlimited patience, and a determination to do what is best for
her pupils, no matter what the opposition, or how hard the task may be.
"He who can plant courage in the human soul is the best physician," and
this is one of the chief duties of the home teacher. Some knowledge of
nervous diseases is also essential, and it is often necessary to
exercise the greatest care and patience in giving the first few lessons,
as an unwise word, or a failure to understand conditions, may lead to
untold misery. This is especially true in cases of sudden blindness, as
the pupil is often afraid to move about his own room, confused by the
altered conditions, and bewildered by a multitude of sounds hitherto
unnoticed. It is absolutely necessary to have the co-operation of the
family, and I am often obliged to insist that changes be made in the
household arrangements, in order to help a pupil through the trying
period of readjustment. This is sometimes fraught with difficulties for
both pupil and teacher, but the latter should never lose sight of the
comfort and benefit of her charge, and should care nothing for
unreasonable objections or selfish protests.

The blind adult is in need of some one who, while recognizing the
undeniable calamity and loss, is yet ready to lend a steadying hand,
encourage the uncertain feet to their old, free movements, lead the
troubled thoughts into other channels, and find new methods of doing old
things. Thus encouraged, the blind adult will soon resume his normal
attitude, realize that much good work may yet be done, and that others
have blazed a trail which he may follow, if he will. But if his family
and friends feel that, because eyesight is lost, all is lost, and tell
him that, because of his affliction he can do nothing, he will do
nothing. But if they tell him he has a handicap, and that they will help
him to work it off, all his fighting blood will come to the rescue, and
he will say, with Emerson, "the king is the man who can." I give this
sentence to all my pupils, and their spirit leaps to the call, and,
holding to my hand for the first few, uncertain steps, trusting in my
assurance that very soon they will find their way along this new path,
the bent shoulders straighten, the bowed head is lifted, the darkness is
dispelled by the light of purpose, soul sight replaces physical sight,
and the pupil is ready to face life again, undaunted and unafraid. What
a wonderful privilege, what a rare opportunity for service, to the
teacher alive to the possibilities of her unique position! "When the
song goes out of your life, you can not start another while it is
ringing in your ears; but let a bit of a silence fall, and then, maybe,
a psalm will come, by and by." To live by a song is all very beautiful
and wonderful, but to live by a psalm is braver and worthier. And, in
the case of the blind adult, the readjustment period may be called the
interim between the song and the psalm.

During these trying months, the blind adult should not be left alone, to
fight his way "out of darkness, through blood, into light." He should
have immediate and competent care at the hands of one who is familiar
with his needs, and familiar, too, with the possibilities of his altered
condition. An occupation, however light, is an absolute necessity.
Enforced idleness is an added affliction, and one not easily borne. The
government realizes this fact, and its program for the blinded soldier
includes many forms of handcraft, to be taught in the hospitals. Netting
is taught, and the soldiers are encouraged to whittle. I was glad to see
this latter occupation included in the "first aid" program, as I have
recommended it for many years. When a man whittles, he whistles, maybe
not just at first, but some day, almost before he realizes it, he finds
himself whistling, and he is then well on the road toward a sane
acceptance of the new conditions. I have found whittling to be as
soothing to masculine nerves as knitting or crocheting to feminine ones.
The ability to use the hands in some light work, removes the feeling of
helplessness and enables the adult to keep his mind on his fingers; and
this effort at concentration is often the means of preserving reason,
and reviving in the soul the desire to take up the struggle of life
again.

At this stage, the adult should be induced to learn to read raised type,
and to write letters to his friends. There are several writing devices
by means of which a blind person can once more use pencil or pen, and
the ability to do this marks another milestone in his progress.

When the adult is able to read and write once more, perhaps to use the
typewriter, he feels encouraged, and begins to ask what other blind men
are doing, and to wonder what avenues of usefulness still remain open to
him. Whenever practicable, I induce the men to resume their former
occupations, or suggest other lines of work suited to their altered
condition. One young man who was an electrical engineer before his
blindness, now wires houses in Los Angeles, his work always passing the
inspector, despite the opposition of sighted competitors. He has his own
shop, and there he assembles chandeliers, repairs motors, and charges
storage batteries. It takes him longer to do the work than formerly, but
its character is the same, and his heart sings with the joy of the task,
and he is working off his handicap, in the hope that others may follow
where he leads. In May he cleared one hundred and fifty dollars, above
all expenses. Another young man supports two small children raising
poultry, designing his own roosts, coops and troughs. Another man is
making good selling janitor and sanitary supplies to hotels and
apartment houses. Two of the men are doing well in a house to house
canvass for brushes of various kinds. Several men are in the real estate
business, and one has bought a home and is supporting his aged father.
Another does expert work with the typewriter and dictaphone.

I encourage the women to knit, crochet, sew and cook by proving to them
that this is possible without eyesight, and I feel certain that, through
such efforts, many a domestic tragedy has been averted. I induce the
older men, or those who can not take up any line of business, to work in
the garden, chop wood, cut lawns, go to the near-by stores, and make
themselves a necessary factor in the household. The possibilities of our
work, and the real good accomplished, can not be told in words, but its
effects may be seen in many homes where men and women, strengthened and
encouraged, are once more assuming their rightful places in the
household, sharing the work and the responsibility, just as in the days
before blindness came upon them.

In order to bring the work within reach of those to whom it is not
possible to give oral instruction, we have a correspondence course for
pupils in this and neighboring states. In this way, we are reaching
people from Humboldt to San Diego county in this state, and the list
includes persons from Arizona, Washington, Nevada and Oregon. This
course is well known to every county librarian in the state, and even
custodians of very small branches send us the names of blind persons in
their vicinity. Among the correspondence pupils is a man who was
superintendent of a power plant before losing his eyesight, and he still
holds the position, despite his handicap. He tests meters in three power
houses daily, walking a distance of three miles in order to reach them
all. I taught him to read and write two systems, to use a writing board,
and he has now mastered the typewriter. He is a brave man silently
fighting his way along the dark trail, and I am privileged in being
permitted to guide his unaccustomed feet over the rocks and crevices I
have long since learned to avoid. Another of the pupils is in the
insurance business, and is also one of the Four Minute men in his
country's service. I could give you many more instances of the splendid
courage of these men and women who, though deprived of the most
important of the special senses in adult life, are cheerfully doing
their best, wasting no time in straining after the fruit just over
"Fate's barbed wire fence."

Our work carries us into hospitals and almshouses, and, through the
co-operation of charitable organizations, we find the poor and, in
addition to teaching them to read, we endeavor to better their
condition, and the charities are always glad to second our efforts. The
teacher in Los Angeles goes regularly to the County Hospital and County
Farm, and up here I teach in the San Francisco Hospital, Relief Home,
and in the San Leandro Infirmary, and it is a great joy to minister to
these lonely, friendless souls. In the Relief Home I have a splendid
class, and I go there once each week, and read to all the men in the
ward, blind and seeing, before giving the lessons. Two of the men are
knitting, one is making squares for the Belgian baby blankets, and the
other a muffler for the Navy League. When I asked for volunteer
knitters, one old colored man said, "Madam, my hands are not steady
enough to knit, but I can hold the yarn for some man to wind."

I am also teaching in the State Industrial Home for Adult Blind in
Oakland, and I look upon the afternoon spent there as the redletter day
of the week. I go from there each Tuesday with a fresh supply of courage
and inspiration. The men collect funny stories to tell me, and the women
show their appreciation in countless, little ways. The State Library is
proud of its borrowers in this institution, and not long ago had some
pictures taken, showing the men reading[1] and the women knitting. It is
an inspiring sight to see the men waiting for their lessons. They come
in from the shop, where they have been sorting broom corn, sewing or
tying brooms--young men and old--all eager to avail themselves of the
services of the teacher, anxious to learn everything possible that will
help to broaden their outlook on life--fine, brave fellows, all of them.
Many have become blind within recent years, victims of industrial
accidents in factories, quarries or mines. The thought of the blinded
soldier has roused these men to renewed effort, in the hope that their
success as broom makers may encourage other blind men who must learn a
trade after the war. And their broom shop is a wonderful place to visit,
with seventy blind men, and a blind foreman to inspire and encourage the
workers. The business of the institution is principally wholesale,
although some of the blind men have worked up a good retail trade in
Oakland. The sales of the institution average $6,500 per month, and with
increased capital, more material and a larger plant, it could handle
three times its present business. The board of directors will ask the
legislature to increase the appropriation, to enlarge the plant, and to
provide an industrial teacher to go into the homes of the blind, teach
them weaving, basketry, chair caning and knitting, the Home to market
the products, deducting the cost of material from the amount paid to the
workers. This industrial teacher is greatly needed, and it is hoped the
legislature will make it possible for the Home to enlarge its sphere of
usefulness and provide employment for many who are not inmates, but who
need to contribute to their own support.

[Footnote 1: See illustration, p. 4.]

The men of the Home are not alone in their desire to help in the hour of
their country's need. More than a dozen women are knitting for the men
in the trenches. They are an Auxiliary of the Navy League, and their
work is the finest of any turned in by the thousands of knitters in the
bay region. They knit socks and sweaters, helmets and mufflers. One of
the women made five pairs of socks in one week, with never a dropped
stitch anywhere. This same woman made three sweaters in ten days, all
perfect garments. The wife of the superintendent is the teacher, and two
of the blind women help the others by picking up dropped stitches,
straightening puckers, and suggesting easier methods to the
inexperienced workers. Those who can not knit, snip rags for the
ambulance pillows, hem Red Cross handkerchiefs, and sew on hospital
quilts. In addition to this, a blind invalid in San Francisco rips up
work poorly done by seeing knitters, and the members of our wonderful
auxiliary make perfect garments from the used wool. This stimulates them
to do their very best, for they know they are proving to the public that
the fingers of the blind worker are deft and sure, and that, given the
opportunity, they can knit as well, and often better, than their more
fortunate sisters. They feel, too, that they are doing their best to
promote the comfort of the soldiers, doing it evenings, after working in
the shop all day, where they cane chairs and make toy and whisk brooms.
I am sure we need not go to the hospitals of France in search of blind
heroes--we have them right here in our midst, and are proud of them. The
State Library permits me to devote all the time necessary to keep the
women supplied with wool, and return the garments to the Navy League.
The library regards this as a part of its campaign of enlightenment, and
it is confident untold good will result, both to the public and to the
blind. In addition to their work, both men and women read a great deal,
and dozens of books are mailed to and from the Home each day.

And so the State Library is doing its share toward the re-education of
the blind adult, has been doing it for the past thirteen years. It
provides the best books available in the various types. It has over
eight thousand books in circulation, and its list of borrowers numbers
more than one thousand. The keynote of this department is Service, and
each borrower is made to feel that his success is of vital importance to
the Library, and when a new reader is added to the list, a note is
usually sent, welcoming him to the family circle. For we are all like
one large family circle--with common aims, common interests and a common
goal--namely, to spread far and wide the gospel of home teaching, to do
our best in order to help others similarly placed, and to prove
ourselves worthy of the help so generously given by the State Library.

Another potent factor in the work of re-education is the Matilda Ziegler
Magazine, a periodical in raised type published since 1907, through the
generosity of Mrs. Matilda Ziegler, head of the Royal Baking Powder
Company of New York. This magazine is printed in New York City, and sent
to the homes of more than twelve thousand persons in the United States
and Canada. It is like any other magazine, with current events, timely
articles, short stories, poetry, a woman's page, and a page of humor. In
addition to this, every month there is an article telling of the success
of some blind person, the account written by the man or woman in the
form of a letter to the editor. And the manager, Mr. Walter G. Holmes,
is a man with a heart of gold; he has his finger on the pulse of the
blind of the country, and he believes in them, loves them, and brings
out the best that is in them. Every number contains a map of some of the
warring countries, and so the readers are kept in touch with all the
vital issues of the day. Many a man is induced to learn to read raised
type just to read this magazine. And so Mrs. Ziegler's philanthropy can
not be too highly commended, and her name and that of Mr. Holmes are
enshrined in the hearts of the blind. Her service to them is
incalculable.

The government is making extensive preparation for the re-education of
our blinded soldiers, both in the hospitals of France and the hospital
school at Baltimore. The grounds and some of the buildings of this
school were given to the government by Mrs. T. Harrison Garrett of
Baltimore, and no expense is being spared in providing every care and
facility for the training and comfort of the blind soldiers who are to
be rehabilitated and returned, not to the battlefields of France, but to
the battle ground of life. The government plans to begin the
re-education in the base hospitals, to continue it at the ports of
embarkation, and complete it in the hospital school at Baltimore. The
training in this school is to be patterned after that of St. Dunstan's
in London, where the work of re-education, under the direction of Sir
Arthur Pearson, himself a blind man, is meeting with the greatest
success. The Red Cross Institute for the Blind is on the same grounds as
the Hospital School, and is supplementing the work of the government in
a most able manner. Typewriting, dictaphone, switchboard operating,
telegraphy, osteopathy, massage, and salesmanship are to be taught to
those who are fitted for these branches; and trades and occupations,
including piano tuning, winding coils for armatures used in electric
motors, joinery, mat and mattress making, broom and basket making, rug
weaving, and shoe cobbling are to be taught to those who are not fitted
for the professions. The government will send over to France at least
one blind teacher for each base hospital, for his inspirational value to
the men during the first trying months of the readjustment period. Blind
teachers will be employed in this country, too, and the government is
already looking about for those best qualified for such positions. All
blind soldiers will be given an opportunity to learn to read and write
the raised system, and provision is being made for an enlarged
circulation of books, and for newer publications to be embossed in the
universal Braille system. In this work, the volunteers who learn to
write Braille can materially assist, by copying short stories, timely
articles, and nonsense verse to be distributed among the blind of their
communities, and for the pleasure of the returned soldiers.

When the men have been a sufficient time in the hospital school, they
are to be returned to their own cities and towns, and the government,
through its agent empowered to find employment for handicapped soldiers,
will endeavor to secure work for them in existing industrial
institutions and plants in the various states. It is also planned to
place capable blind men in shops with the seeing, whenever possible. I
say whenever possible, for it will take time and much effort to persuade
employers to include blind men among their employees. But the day is not
far distant when the public will see the wisdom of providing work for
its handicapped men and women, and condemn those who fail to co-operate
with the government in securing positions for those qualified to fill
them. The government is generous in its appropriation of funds to carry
on this re-education, but it does not include the civilian blind in this
program. The blind adult in civil life must be employed or cared for by
the civilian population, and this brings me to the discussion of the
attitude of the public toward the blind since three-fourths of the blind
of America could be gainfully employed right now, if the public would
only believe in them, would only give them an opportunity to prove their
ability. With his remaining faculties keenly alert, with a courage and
fortitude born of many trials, the blind adult is prepared to face life
squarely, undaunted and unafraid, asking only to take his place on the
firing line, to march shoulder to shoulder with his seeing brother, and
to do a man's work in the world.




THE ATTITUDE OF THE PUBLIC TOWARD THE BLIND.


In discussing this subject I realize I have a most difficult and
delicate task before me--a task which only a blind person can adequately
perform. I approach it with no misgiving, with no unkind feeling, for,
as I have previously stated, I believe the public needs, not so much to
be instructed, as to be reminded, and I believe it will be glad to have
some of its mistaken ideas corrected, and thus bring about a better
understanding between the two classes.

In the first place, I wish to mention some popular fallacies concerning
the blind. Chief among these is the idea that all blind people are so
much happier than sighted people. This belief seems very general, and
comes, I suppose, as a result of the feeling of the average human being
that, if deprived of eyesight, he could never be induced to laugh again.
The blind adult soon realizes that "humor is a shock absorber," and that
"mirth is the soul's best medicine." When my pupils fail to recognize
the efficacy of humor, I establish a rule that they must laugh at least
once during each lesson, and very soon they agree with Charles Lamb that
"a laugh is worth a hundred groans in any market." One of my foreign
pupils said to me when I spoke of his cheerful attitude, "Madam, I laugh
that I may not weep." And this is the key to much of the cheerfulness of
the blind, whose philosophy is not often understood by their sighted
friends. There is nothing really remarkable about making the best of a
trying situation, unless it is the small percentage of persons who do
so. People feel so sorry for the blind that they are often unable to
address them at all, or, when they do speak, convey a whole world of
well-meant but misdirected sympathy in a few ill-chosen words. This
misdirected sympathy is one of the hardest things the blind adult has to
bear, and often when I urge a man to go out among his friends as he did
when he could see, he answers, "I can't do it just yet. I can't bear the
pitying tone. It would make me lose my grip, and I must not let go." And
sometimes I go to his friends and explain the situation, and persuade
them to call on their friend, take him out with them, talk to him of the
ordinary, commonplace happenings, keeping their sympathy well disguised,
or, rather, showing a comprehending sympathy, a sympathy that recognizes
a brave man's effort to accept his fate unwhimperingly.

Another popular belief is that the blind are naturally very religious.
Unfortunately, this belief seems to be shared by those who selected many
of the books to be printed in raised types, since about one-half of the
books selected are of a religious character. The blind are naturally
introspective, and their power of concentration is greater than that of
the average person, but I have not found them to be unusually religious.
I do not think that blindness increases or decreases the religious
tendency.

A third fallacy is that the blind can tell colors by feeling. This is
absolutely impossible. I have heard of men who could tell the difference
of color in horses, but, upon questioning them closely, I found that the
texture of the hair varied in light and dark colored animals. Of course,
there is an odor about some colored dyes, such as black and indigo blue.
Some of the blind are themselves responsible for fostering this belief,
but they do it to test the credulity of the public, and they do not know
the real harm they are doing to the cause.

It is a common belief, too, that all blind people like music, and are
especially gifted in this art. I do not believe that the percentage of
really musical blind people is greater than that of persons who see.
Sometimes a blind man or woman will study music either as a pastime, or
in the hope of making a living, but the lack of eyesight does not
increase or diminish one's musical ability.

In the lecture on the psychology of blindness, I endeavored to prove
that the blind were not possessed of greater faculties than their seeing
fellows, but that loss of eyesight made it imperative to cultivate the
remaining senses to a very high degree, and that such cultivation led to
a greater keenness in the interpretation of the information furnished
the remaining senses. When told that the blind do many things well and
quickly by employing methods different than those who see, the
information comes as a shock, when it is not entirely discredited. There
is an idea prevalent among so-called well informed men and women that a
loss of eyesight carries with it a loss of mental vigor, and a total
inability to engage in any of the world's work. This belief, and the
many foolish notions which it breeds, presents one of the greatest
difficulties to be met, and, if possible, overcome, by the blind man or
woman obliged to earn a livelihood. So potent is eyesight considered
that, without it, some people think it impossible to perform even the
simplest duties, and the person obliged to substitute fingers for eyes,
and memory for pad and pencil is regarded as a marvel of intelligence
and skill, and as possessing a sixth sense. Anything done by the blind,
from recognizing a voice to remembering a street number, is considered
wonderful by the average person, and this attitude is very trying to the
blind adult who is striving to adjust himself to new conditions, and
train his remaining faculties to the highest possible degree of
efficiency. The commiseration and incredulous words of his friends is
one of the greatest trials which the blind adult is called upon to bear,
and it is not strange that he is often embittered and discouraged, and
unwilling to subject himself to the thoughtless comments and undisguised
pity of his former associates. These associates do not realize that
their attitude has changed or that they are adding another burden to the
already heavy load borne by their friend. They are sorry, honestly
sorry, and want so much to help, but to their minds blindness is the
greatest of all afflictions, and loss of eyesight is accompanied by a
corresponding loss of physical ability and mental vigor, unless the
person so afflicted is unusually gifted, and, in that case, he is
regarded as the marvel of the age. Unfortunately, the percentage of
gifted people is no greater among the blind than among the seeing, and
so it is not strange that many of the former class are unable to cope
with the difficulties and discouragements that blindness entails, when
thousands of seeing people succumb to what they consider the unequal
struggle for existence. As a class I honestly believe that blind people
are more courageous than seeing people, and I am sure that a greater
demand is made upon their stock of courage. This demand will be lessened
when the public learns to look upon blindness as a physical, not a
mental handicap, and when, instead of compelling persons so handicapped
to sit on the side lines holding their broken swords, it leads them
forward, places a new sword in their hands, and brings them the glad
tidings that they are needed on the firing line. Loss of eyesight is
always deplorable, but it is not so terrible as the isolation which
generally follows it, an isolation due, in large measure, to
misconception, lack of information, and misplaced sympathy on the part
of the public, generous to a fault in bestowing alms, but slow to
believe in the ability of the blind, and the wisdom of employing them.
If the public could be brought to look upon the blind, not as an
isolated class whose affliction entitles them to the pity and generous
alms of those more fortunate, but as men and women, with normal aims and
desires, just as full of hope, just as eager to work, and just as
interested in things as when they saw them through the natural medium,
their handicap would be lessened and their lives much happier. Most
people think all that can be done for the blind is to divert them, amuse
them, provide for them in institutions, or encourage them to accept
private charity. This lack of understanding on the part of the public is
the greatest drawback to the advancement of the blind, and often leads
to untold misery. Occupation the blind should have, must have, if they
are to enjoy any degree of happiness, or retain their self-respect. Loss
of eyesight does not deprive a man of his desire to earn his daily
bread, or to provide for those dependent upon him. He is willing and
eager to work, and should be given the chance. A French physician,
himself without eyesight, said: "So long as the blind can still bring
their stone, however small it may be, to the building of civilization,
or of bringing happiness to their kind, they feel that they live; and
whatever be the wounds received, they are not out of the battle of
life--the inequality of arms only increases their ardor." This
inequality of arms should, and usually does, act as a spur to the
courageous man or woman, but to the mind of the average sighted person,
this inequality seems to apply inability, and so very little is expected
of the blind, and little thought is given to their possibilities.
Senator Gore, the blind Senator from Oklahoma, says: "It is a mistake to
tell the sightless their loss is insurmountable or inconsequential. It
is neither. The sightless confront a situation, not a theory. We ought
to study their problems, and help them to lessen their burdens, to
smooth their path, and to multiply their resources, to enable them to
adapt themselves to a new and sometimes a strange environment; to help
them to adjust themselves to a new set of circumstances, which presents
a different problem, as it presents a different situation from those who
possess the sense of sight." "And," the Senator concludes, "the greatest
service we can render to the blind is to help them to help themselves."
And this is where the public can help, though, as I have said, in its
mistaken kindness, it more often hinders, and encourages the blind to
accept alms, instead of making it possible for them to become
self-supporting, self-respecting men and women.

The constantly increasing number of blinded men in the warring countries
has made it imperative to find work in which they can successfully
engage, and trades and occupations hitherto untried have been found to
be both practicable and lucrative. What Sir Arthur Pearson is doing for
the blinded soldiers at St. Dunstan's is little short of marvelous, and
his success should help the cause in all parts of the world. In Eastern
cities, a large number of the blind are gainfully employed, and new
avenues of usefulness are being opened to them. At Ampere, New Jersey,
Dr. Schuyler S. Wheeler has formed what he calls the Double Duty Finger
Guild. This is composed of some twenty blind people, sixteen men and
four women, and they have been taught to wind coils for armatures used
in electric motors and mill machinery. These people earn from a dollar
and a half to two dollars a day, and their work is done as well as that
of the sighted employees, though, just at first, a little more time is
required. They are making up this discrepancy slowly, but surely, and it
is thought they will soon do the work as fast as the sighted operatives.
Unfortunately, on this coast, we have no factories where this winding is
done, as most of the electric concerns here do repair work, which varies
so that it would be difficult for the blind operative to keep changing
from one kind of work to another. Henry Ford employs a number of blind
men in his factory at Detroit. There the men fit nuts to bolts, wind
armatures, assemble different parts of machinery, and fold paper boxes.
In his factory Mr. Ford also employs other handicapped men, and has
machinery especially devised for their use. He believes that all large
factories should employ a certain percentage of handicapped workers, as
its contribution to the rehabilitation movement, and it is to be hoped
his example may be followed by employers all over the country. The
Light-House for the Blind in New York City, the Cleveland Association
for the Blind in Ohio, and other similar associations are doing splendid
work in arousing the interest of the public, and in finding employment
for blind men and women, both in their homes, and in shops with sighted
persons. Mattress making and upholstering have been found particularly
adapted to the blind, and in Boston thousands of mattresses are made and
renovated yearly by blind workers employed in the shops of the
Massachusetts Commission for the Blind. Folding towels in laundries,
wrapping bread, packing catsup bottles and fruit cans are some of the
things being successfully done in the East. And the increasing shortage
of labor will induce employers throughout the country to see the light,
and realize that what the blind operative loses because of lack of
sight, he makes up by increased concentration and faithfulness to duty.
In the West, the people have very little faith in the ability of the
blind, but in time we hope the social consciousness will become less
lethargic, and that the mental and physical needs of this class will be
given the consideration accorded to them in the larger cities throughout
the East. The San Francisco Association for the Blind, a
privately-maintained institution, is doing good work in arousing public
interest, and in its shops the men are taught to make brooms and reed
furniture, and the women to weave rugs and make baskets. It is in
constant search for new fields of endeavor, and this spring it induced
one of the largest canneries to employ over twenty blind people to sort
asparagus, and the same cannery has selected a number of the best
workers to cut fruit in its orchards in the Santa Clara Valley. All this
is very encouraging, but it is only a beginning, as there are hundreds
of blind in this state who should be contributing to their own support.
This is why an enlargement of the plant of the Industrial Home for Adult
Blind in Oakland is so urgently needed, for, after all, the state should
assume the duty of providing its handicapped civilians with employment,
instead of caring for them in almshouses, or permitting them to become
objects of private charity. The state should see to it that its blind
children receive an education which will fit them to earn their own
living. All schools for the blind should be under the direct supervision
of Boards of Education, who should give the same careful consideration
to the problem of educating blind children as is now given to the
education of seeing children. And this is one argument in favor of
classes for the blind in the public schools. Vocational training is of
more importance to the blind child than to his more fortunate brother,
and when this is recognized, one of the barriers to his success will be
removed. Is there any reason why an intelligent blind youth especially
interested in medicine, should not be trained as an anatomist, a heart
and lung specialist, an osteopath or a masseur? He does not need eyes to
listen to heart beats, find the third vertebra, or rub the kinks out of
a refractory muscle. In Japan the government reserves massage as an
occupation for the blind, and in the hospitals of England and France
blind masseurs are given the preference, and their work receives the
highest commendation. Los Angeles has a blind anatomist at the head of
its College of Osteopathy, and several blind osteopaths.

When mentally equipped, all blind students should be sent to college,
and urged to fit themselves as teachers. In every college and university
blind men should occupy chairs in history, English, economics, and
mathematics. I know two blind men in this state well qualified to teach
any of these subjects, who are forced to accept inferior positions,
because educators generally fail to realize that blindness is no bar to
mental attainment, and that the ability to teach does not depend upon
the ability to see with the eyes. This will be better understood when
the coeducation of blind and seeing children becomes more general--God
speed the day! As music teachers, concert players, leaders of orchestra,
or masters of the violin and 'cello, the blind should have an even
chance of success, but their inability to read music at sight, or watch
the director's baton often deprives them of positions which their quick
ear and well trained memory would enable them to fill with profit to
themselves and satisfaction to the public.

And so in all the professions. I know a man who, before he lost his
eyesight, was considered an eminent lawyer, but now his associates
regard him pityingly, and his clients take their business elsewhere.
When the light went out of the eyes of this brilliant man, it did not
take his brain as well. He is fitted to be a consulting lawyer or court
pleader, and could occupy a chair in a college of law. Surely, there is
something radically wrong when these conditions exist! Surely the public
needs to open its eyes, and polish its glasses in order to see more
clearly that there is a mental blindness, more pitiful, more
far-reaching in its consequences, than physical blindness, however hard
or uncomfortable the latter condition may be. Some one facetiously
suggested that I call this lecture "bringing light to the seeing," and,
in a sense, this is what I am trying to do. But the light is carried by
a kindly hand, and the hand is the index to a heart in which there is no
bitterness, no malice, no distrust--a heart brimming over with love,
with hope, with confidence, and with a belief that the public _will_ see
the light, and, seeing it, and reading my message in its beams, will
pass it on to others, adding to it as it goes, until it floods every
corner of our vast state, and result in untold good for my people. And
let me tell you how this light may be disseminated--let me apportion
your share in this labor of love, this highest form of social service,
this movement of re-education now sweeping over the land.

I am so often asked by those who wish to volunteer in their country's
service, "What can I do to help in the re-education of the blinded
soldier?" And I invariably answer, "You can first help in the
re-education of the public, and this will be the greatest service you
can render to the men blinded in battle." In order to know what lines of
work will be available for them when they return, we must look about and
see what the adult blind of our civil communities are doing. If we can
not employ all these who are willing and able to work, how can we hope
to employ an increased number later on? Let us ask ourselves what the
blind can do, and then, how much of this are we permitting them to do?
If we are an employer of salesmen, and one of our employees has recently
lost his eyesight, let us ask ourselves why, when he came to us and
urged us to let him continue to sell our goods, we told him that,
although he had been a faithful worker, and we were exceedingly sorry
for his misfortune, we could not retain his services, because
competition was so great, and so many unexpected things happened, and we
felt we could not entrust our business to any one who did not possess
all his faculties. We meant to be very kind, and we thought every word
we said was true, but was it true? Did that man sell our goods with his
eyes, or did he sell them by using his tongue and his personality to
persuade customers to patronize us? If he had a boy to go about with
him, could he not talk as convincingly, work as hard, and, indeed, might
he not put forth a greater effort to extend our business and make
himself invaluable to us? This is a typical case, and one that occurs
almost daily. So it is in all lines of work the blind man or woman
attempts. A blind piano tuner asks for work from house to house, just as
a sighted tuner has to do, but, whereas we sometimes employ the latter,
we refuse the former, saying, we could not trust our instrument to the
hands of a blind man, and maybe we offer him a small piece of silver to
lessen the hurt we have unwittingly inflicted. Perhaps a man with
defective eyesight asks to clean house or help in the garden, or work on
a ranch, or perform some light task in a store. The same condition
obtains. We are so hurried these days, we must have the work done with
the greatest possible expediency, and so we can not entrust it to any
one who is handicapped, although we are sorry, and really wish we could
do something for such people. And so sometimes, men who started out with
high hopes and lofty ideals are forced to the streets, there to depend
upon the spasmodic charity of the passerby, and to attract this wavering
attention of the public, the man resorts to all sorts of subterfuges,
from holding up pencils and gum to grinding out popular tunes on a
wheezing old hand organ. Sometimes these men have families and feel they
must make this effort to maintain them. Many of them try to sell
newspapers on the corners of our principal streets, but here, too, the
competition is very great, and little boys patrol the curb, holding the
ever-ready paper under the nose of the hurrying pedestrian who, though
he may be conscious of the blind man selling in front of a building,
thinks he can not spare time to go to him for a paper, and so snatches
one from the waiting boy, throws him the pennies, and jumps on a moving
car. Selling newspapers is better suited to a blind man than almost any
other line of business. I mean the man who has never learned a trade, or
who has no special profession. If the government could commandeer this
line of work for its blind civilians, I am sure there would be fewer
itinerant street musicians, gum or pencil venders. Of course, after a
while, the blind man reduced to playing on the streets, becomes
accustomed to the excitement, the roar of traffic, and covers, I will
not say earns, more money than he could by canvassing, piano tuning, or
making brooms. And so, once started on this road, once accustomed to the
acceptance of public charity, it is almost impossible to induce the
street vender or musician to try a more legitimate means of livelihood.
He invariably says, in answer to the protest of those who have the
interest and advancement of the blind at heart, "When you can find me a
job where I can earn as much as I do right here, I'll take it, but until
then, I must live, and I must help to support my family." Meanwhile
these street merchants are creating an erroneous impression in the minds
of the unthinking, but ever sympathetic public, leading it to believe
that begging is all that the blind can do; and so, when asked to employ
a blind person, even in the smallest capacity, people mention the blind
of the street, and say they will gladly contribute to the support of the
sightless either in institutions, or by private charity, but they do not
believe in their ability to perform work of any kind. Of course, this is
not the answer given in every case, but it is the reply generally made
to all such requests. This is the sad state of affairs here and in many
of the large cities throughout the country, and this is why the State
Library is conducting a campaign for the enlightenment of the public.
Whenever possible, I raise my voice in this cause, before clubs and
organizations, high schools and colleges, in order to change this
mistaken attitude, in order to urge a saner point of view. In presenting
this gospel of work for the blind, I put the matter very plainly, prove
to the public that it is to blame for many of the conditions I deplore,
laugh at its incredulity, score its misconception, urge a broader, more
comprehensive sympathy, and usually leave the platform with the
assurance that I have won many recruits in this campaign so dear to my
heart.

As I said in my last lecture, the government has a well-defined plan for
the re-education of its blinded soldiers. But suppose this plan is
carried out, and the men are returned to their home cities, qualified to
pursue a certain line of work, only to find that the public does not
share the government's confidence, is unwilling to give them an
opportunity to prove their ability? The public will cheerfully pay taxes
to care for these men in idleness and seclusion, thus diverting to the
rear of life's battle line these heroes who have given the most precious
of all their physical possessions in their country's cause. The soldier
killed on the field of battle pays the supreme sacrifice all in a
moment, but the sacrifice of the blinded soldier is lifelong. Are we
going to find employment for these returned heroes, or are we going to
add yet another burden to their already heavy load? Are we going to add
the burden of dependence to the burden of darkness? If we want these men
to know that we appreciate the service they have rendered to their
country, let us provide occupations for them, and in order to do this
let us begin by employing the civilian blind, the blind right here in
our midst. Let us study the problem with an open mind, freed from the
old prejudice and unbelief; let us turn the light on ourselves, and see
that it is we who sit in darkness. Let us ask the blind leaders of the
blind what work can be done without eyesight, and let us be guided by
their judgment, their experience. And, as a bit of Red Cross service,
let us employ the blind; let us create a demand for their labor; let us
ask for work made by the blind, and tell our friends to ask for it; let
us buy our newspapers from the men on the streets, and let us give our
magazine subscriptions to blind men who have subscription agencies; let
us patronize blind lawyers, osteopaths, salesmen, piano tuners and
musicians. Let us find other and broader avenues of usefulness for these
our civil blind heroes, who went into the dark with no blare of
trumpets, no applause from cheering multitudes, and who wear no badge of
honor on their breasts. Let us do this, so that when the blinded
soldiers return, we may welcome them with the glad tidings that we have
work waiting for them, that we know they can do it, because blind men
and women here have blazed the trail, and have, by their splendid
courage and boundless enthusiasm, succeeded in changing the attitude of
the public, and removing the last lingering vestige of doubt as to the
ability of the blind to become self-supporting, self-respecting
citizens. In this campaign of enlightenment, this bit of Red Cross
service for the blinded soldiers and the blind adults of our civil
communities, every one of you can help, and I feel sure it will be
unnecessary for me to ask a pledge of co-operation from any one who has
heard me speak this afternoon. The State Library is heartily with me in
every phase of this campaign, and, with its co-operation and
encouragement, I go fearlessly forward, overcoming obstacles, uprooting
prejudices, laboring with heart and mind and voice in the service of the
blind and in the hope of bringing about a clearer understanding of their
needs in the minds of the public.

And now, in conclusion, let me tell you my dream for the future of the
blind, a dream which, please God, will one day come true. I dream of
seeing blind men occupying chairs in our colleges and universities,
blind heart and lung specialists, anatomists and osteopaths, lawyers and
lecturers. In my dream, I see blind salesmen, telegraphers, musicians,
piano tuners and electricians, and other men making brooms, brushes,
mattresses and furniture now so often made by prison labor. And in my
dream, I see blind women teachers, stenographers, dictaphone and
switchboard operators; and other women knitting, crocheting, sewing,
cooking, weaving rugs and making baskets, and doing the work side by
side with their more fortunate sisters, and doing it as well, and often
better. Then and only then will the greatest sting be removed from
blindness; then and only then will the blind beggar depart from our
public thoroughfares, and when all these things come to pass, my dream
for my people will be realized. Aren't you going to help to make my
dream "come true"?




PREVENTION OF BLINDNESS AND CONSERVATION OF VISION IN ADULTS AND
CHILDREN.[2]


Helen Keller, in writing on prevention of blindness, says: "Try to
realize what blindness means to those whose joyous activity is stricken
to inactivity. It is to live long, long days, and life is made up of
days. It is to live immured, baffled, impotent, all God's world shut
out. It is to sit helpless, defrauded, while your spirit strains and
tugs at its fetters, and your shoulders ache with the burden they are
denied--the rightful burden of labor."

[Footnote 2: Reprinted from News Notes of California Libraries, vol. 14,
no. 1, Jan. 1919.]

When I was twelve years old, the well-known oculist, Dr Barkan of
blessed memory, came to examine the eyes of all the children in the
School for the Blind at Berkeley. I was the first to be examined, and I
remember distinctly every word of the great doctor when, after looking
at my eyes, he turned to the superintendent, and said sadly, "Needlessly
blind! her eyesight _could_ have been saved." These words made a
profound impression upon my childish mind, and as I sat and listened,
while child after child was examined, and heard again and again the same
remark, "needlessly blind!" I resolved to know more about this eye
disease with the very long name, ophthalmia neonatorum, to learn its
cause, and see just how it might have been prevented. But we did not
hear as much about prevention as we do now, and, although I did not
forget the matter, it was many years before I had an opportunity to
study it further. When I did, I found that at least one-fourth of the
children in schools for the blind in this country were there, just
because a simple precaution was not taken at the time of their birth.

Five years before I knew there was such a thing as unnecessary blindness
(since I had been told I was blind as the result of a severe cold in the
eyes), a Belgian doctor, Professor Crede, a famous obstetrician of
Leipsic, appalled at the number of children who lost their eyesight
within a few days after birth from a virulent eye infection, determined
to try the effect of a simple prophylaxis, a two per cent solution of
nitrate of silver, dropped in the eyes of every newborn child. The
effect of the prophylaxis used in Dr Crede's clinic was marvelous,
reducing the number of cases from ten per cent in 1880, to one-fourth of
one per cent in 1886.

"Babies' sore eyes," or ophthalmia neonatorum, is defined by Dr Sydney
Stephenson as "an inflammatory disease of the conjunctiva, usually
appearing within the first few days of life, due to the action of a
pus-producing germ introduced into the eyes of the infant at birth." Dr
Crede found that, by putting two drops of the solution into each of the
infant's eyes at birth, all danger of infection was averted. The
solution is harmless to healthy eyes, and, in ninety-nine cases out of a
hundred, destroys infecting germs when they are present. The cost of the
drops is nominal, about two cents per patient, and yet over ten thousand
persons in the United States, and as many more in other countries, have
been deprived of the most important of the special senses through the
ignorance and neglect of doctors and midwives, and the public at large,
as to the gravity of the disease, and the methods of prevention. It is
estimated that twenty babies in every one thousand have sore eyes, and
that from five to eight of these cases are serious, and capable of
causing blindness. Infant ophthalmia is found among all classes, but
more especially among the poor, who must so often depend upon the
services of a midwife or neighbor who, in most instances, does not know
the meaning of the word antiseptic. Consequently, it was found necessary
to make laws for the prevention of this disease. For various reasons, it
is difficult to pass a law making the use of a prophylaxis compulsory,
and in only a few states has this been done. But in more than thirty
states the immediate reporting of infants' sore eyes is compulsory, and
in thirteen states the prophylaxis is distributed free to doctors and
midwives.

In our own state, every precaution is taken to prevent infant
ophthalmia. Dr Edward F. Glaser, secretary of the State Board of Health,
has given this subject unlimited time and study, and, with the help of
the California State Library, California Society for the Prevention of
Blindness, and many social and civic organizations, has conducted a
continuous campaign, and has succeeded in passing a law which is both
simple and effective, and which has resulted in lowering the percentage
of infantile blindness, and in arousing the public to a sense of its
duty in this regard. Dr Glaser and the above-named organizations have
also rendered yeoman service in securing the passage of laws prohibiting
the use of a roller towel, and for the licensing and registering of
midwives.

In this state, the law for the prevention of infant ophthalmia provides
for the immediate reporting of every case of babies' sore eyes, and
failure to do so is considered a misdemeanor, and a third offense
results in the revocation of the license to practice medicine. In 1915,
the State Board of Health purchased 23,000 prophylactic outfits. These
are little wax ampules, containing just enough one per cent nitrate of
silver solution for the eyes of a child at birth. These ampules are
distributed free to physicians and midwives all over the state, and in
the past two years, more than 16,000 have been so distributed. In
California, the birth certificate asks these questions: "Was a
prophylactic for ophthalmia neonatorum used? If so, what?" The birth
certificate must be filed within five days. Few doctors have the
temerity to ignore these questions, or confess that they have used no
prophylactic, so the questions on the certificate insure the use of the
nitrate of silver solution in nine cases out of ten, though its use at
birth is not made compulsory. Dr Glaser reports that the birth
certificates in fourteen of the largest cities of the state, for the
year 1917, show that on eighty-seven per cent of the certificates filed,
the questions had been answered, and the prophylactic used. In Berkeley,
every one of the birth certificates filed in 1917 reported the use of a
prophylactic. The State Board of Health insists on the reporting of all
communicable diseases, and infant ophthalmia is considered one of these,
and in this connection, Dr Glaser says, "a case reported is a case
safeguarded, a physician aided, and a community protected." But it is
necessary to urge a ceaseless warfare against this most prolific cause
of infantile blindness, and social and civic organizations, churches,
schools, and all individuals who deplore needless suffering, are asked
to give the subject the widest publicity. Physicians are only now
beginning to realize that, in all phases of preventive medicine, their
strongest, most necessary, and, indeed, essential ally, is the public,
and the needed stimulus to a better medical performance is an
intelligent knowledge on the part of the people as to what should be
done.

It is a common belief that ophthalmia neonatorum is an indication that
one or both of the infant's parents have led unclean lives, and so,
until recently, it has been difficult to have all such cases reported.
While ophthalmia neonatorum _is_ often the result of the social evil,
the introduction of other pus-producing germs into the eyes at birth is
responsible for a large number of cases. So it should be remembered that
babies' sore eyes is not a disgrace (any baby may have the disease), but
blindness from babies' sore eyes _is_ a disgrace, for, in almost every
case, it can be prevented.

Dr Park Lewis says: "And when we think of the long life of darkness of
the blind, the limited possibilities of the child to be educated, the
narrow lines in which he may hope to be trained, the fields of
usefulness from which he will be cut off by his blindness, his
dependence on others for things he should otherwise do for himself, the
financial loss to the community for his maintenance when he might, under
happier conditions, not only have been self-supporting, but possibly
independent--the pity of it all comes with added emphasis. The
importance, then, increases of every intelligent human being knowing
that the most serious forms of birth infection of the eyes, in almost
every instance, should not have occurred." Dr Lewis continues, "The
majority of the blind are not wage earners, and are thus not only an
added expense, but an economic loss. The education of each blind child
costs the state yearly about three hundred and fifty dollars, while it
costs but thirty dollars to educate a seeing child for the same period.
Ophthalmia neonatorum is a crime, because of the suffering it brings to
helpless, innocent persons, and because it leads to a reduction in
economic efficiency, deprivation of many pleasures and privileges and,
very often, immeasurable misery, suffering and sorrow during a lifetime
in the dark."

Of the twenty children brought to me for inspection during the past
three years, fifteen were blind from infant ophthalmia, and, as I myself
am a victim of this same disease, I am leaving no stone unturned in my
efforts to save other children from hardships and limitations that are
wholly preventable, and I feel that I am peculiarly fitted to help in
this great work.

There are other common causes of blindness in children, one of which is
phlyetenular keratitis, usually the result of poor or improper feeding,
or lack of ventilation, and it often leaves the cornea badly scarred.
Tuberculosis of the eyes results in much the same condition, often
causing total blindness. Measles and scarlet fever cause blindness or
defective vision. Parents do not realize the gravity of these diseases,
and fail to cleanse the eyes frequently, or to keep the room properly
darkened. In some cities, during epidemics of these diseases, health
officers are requested to distribute circulars, calling attention to the
danger to the eyes, and giving instructions as to their care. In this
state, measles and scarlet fever are among the communicable diseases
which must be reported.

Trachoma, a virulent form of conjunctivitis, is a communicable eye
disease which must be carefully safeguarded. It flourishes in
unsanitary surroundings, camps, and homes where the family uses the
common wash basin and towel. There are not many cases in this state, but
even one is too many. We are profiting by the unhappy experience of
Kentucky and other Southern states, and are adopting drastic measures
for its prevention.

Interstitial keratitis, or inherited syphilis, is a common cause of
blindness in children, though, in many cases, the blindness is only
partial, and, if taken in time, the remaining eyesight may be saved.
This disease usually appears between the ages of four and twenty, often
following some childish malady, and it requires the greatest care and
most nourishing food to counteract its pernicious effects. The victim of
interstitial keratitis is never strong, and, although a blood test may
show a negative condition, any serious illness may cause the
constitutional trouble to reappear.

It is a common belief that children will outgrow cross-eyes. This is not
true, for the eye that turns either in or out, will, sooner or later,
become useless, simply from disuse. Such children should have attention
as early as possible, even in infancy, as properly fitted glasses will
usually restore such eyes to their normal condition.

Children are often needlessly blind as the result of an unwise and
harmful selection of toys, such as scissors, forks, toy pistols, air
rifles and bows and arrows. The observance of a sane Fourth of July has
lessened the number of accidents to the eyes of children.

I have thus far spoken of the prevention of blindness in children, and
now I wish to call your attention to what is being done for the
conservation of vision in childhood. In the lecture on the development
of the blind child, I mentioned special classes for blind children in
the public schools. In most of the cities having such classes (Chicago
and Los Angeles excepted), sight saving classes, as they are called, are
maintained. In these conservation classes, the children do not read with
their fingers, but books in heavy face, large type are provided. And for
these books we are indebted to Mr R. B. Irwin, the blind supervisor of
special classes in Cleveland. So here again we find a blind man planning
not only the advancement of blind children, but the conservation of
vision of partially-sighted children. In these classes desk blackboards
are provided, and a great deal of oral instruction is given, and the
amount of reading is limited. A great deal of handwork is required and
everything possible is done to save eyestrain. Much time and thought is
given to the proper lighting of schoolrooms, and to the color scheme of
the buildings. Light should not be judged by its brightness, but rather
by the way it helps us to see what we are looking at. Walls should have
light paper or tinting, as dark walls absorb light strongly, instead of
reflecting it. Reds, greens and browns reflect only ten to fifteen per
cent of the light which falls on them; while cream-color or light
yellowish tints reflect over one-half the light.

As a result of the ophthalmic work of the medical inspection departments
of many of our public schools throughout the country, much is being done
to help children who are partially blind, or suffering from some visual
defect which may lead to blindness if they continue in school under
ordinary conditions. Every large city should have one or more of these
conservation classes, and the demand for them will increase when the
public realizes their importance in saving the sight of school children.
Dr De Schuynitz, an eminent oculist of Philadelphia, in an address on
conservation of vision, asked these questions: "Shall children be
allowed to trifle with their most precious possession? Shall our homes
be permitted to disregard the rules of visual hygiene? Shall children,
and those children of the larger growth--men and women--remain on the
side lines because they can not see well enough to play the great game
of stirring life, with its joy of untrammeled effort? Shall they not
have a game which they _can_ play? Shall we of these better walks of
life pursue our way in smug contentment, and permit the preventable
causes of blindness to continue their black business, and ever add to
the roll of their victims?" The leading oculists of the country
recommend sight-saving classes, and many of them give their time and
money to the service of these handicapped children, establishing clinics
for their care and treatment. In Los Angeles the Parent-Teacher
Association has a wonderful clinic, and Dr Ross A. Harris and his
assistants have saved the eyes of hundreds of children who would
otherwise have become public charges. But here again it is necessary to
educate the public. An old schoolmaster, rich in the wisdom of ripe
experience, has said, "More children's eyes are injured in the home than
in the school," and his words receive daily verification. But in schools
where medical inspection is given, and where a visiting nurse is in
attendance, untold good is being accomplished, and children who should
wear glasses, and attend conservation classes are promptly sent to the
oculist, and assigned a place in school.

The commonest visual defects are, first, inflammation of the cornea, or
imperfections of the lens--the cornea is often so scarred as to make
vision imperfect; second, myopia, or progressive shortsightedness, a
condition in which the axis of the eye gradually grows longer. This
lengthening is accompanied by stretching of the eyeball, and such
children always run the risk of the inner and most important part of the
wall of the eye, the retina or nerve layer, being torn away, and
blindness resulting. When nearsightedness is discovered early, and
glasses are given that make distant vision normal, and all needless near
work forbidden, the myopia may be held in check, and any considerable
increase prevented. Teachers are usually the first to notice such
defects, but many parents do nothing when their attention is called to
the matter. But happily these conditions are improving, and the school
nurse and school clinic, and all the clinics maintained by public and
private charities, are accomplishing wonderful results. When preventive
medicine and preventive social service are joined in the effort to help
mankind, there must result a saving of our most precious physical
possession, and an addition to human joy. The National Committee for the
Prevention of Blindness and Conservation of Vision, with headquarters at
130 East Twenty-second street, New York City, carries on a ceaseless
campaign of enlightenment by means of pamphlets, lectures, charts,
lantern slides and posters, and the work of this society is directed by
Mr Edward M. Van Cleve, Superintendent of the School for the Blind in
New York City. The leading oculists of the United States are members of
the society. Charts and lantern slides are loaned to societies for the
prevention of blindness in the various states, and pamphlets on many
important topics are sold at a nominal cost. When addressing a large
gathering in New York, and urging the wisdom of publicity, Dr De
Schuynitz said: "We are here to help in the work of health education, of
eyesight protection; we are to call on society for aid in devising
measures, and for means to carry them out, in order that effective
results shall merge into perfect victory. We are here, too, I take it,
to cure those who are dull-sighted in this regard, so that, with vision
cleared, they shall join in the struggle for ocular conservation and
make it possible to give sweetness of disposition and ever-present
cheerfulness, not to the blind, the good God sees to that, but to those
who shall be saved from blindness."

In New York and Boston, the children are given instruction in hygiene,
taught to properly care for the nose, throat, eyes and teeth. These
lessons begin as early as the second grade, and are illustrated with
charts showing how perfect teeth and eyes should look. These lessons
include the harmful effect of enlarged tonsils and adenoids, and the
children are very anxious to be in as perfect condition as those shown
in the pictures. A teacher of one of these classes in Boston took her
children to a museum, where they spent a morning studying statuary. The
next day, wishing to see how they had been impressed by what they saw,
she asked, among other questions, "What do you remember about
Aphrodite?" One little boy held his hand up, saying, "She has adenoids."
"What makes you think so?" asked the teacher, wonderingly. "Why, she had
her mouth open all the time." The children learn just how far from the
eyes a book should be held, and often call attention to a companion
whose myopic condition makes it necessary to hold the book very close.
And so the outlook for the children is very promising. With conservation
of vision classes, classes in hygiene, with school nurses and clinics,
with medical inspection of schools, and with the public aroused as never
before to its responsibility towards its boys and girls, we should have
less need for oculists and schools for the blind, and fewer persons
should be obliged to go through life deprived of the light, which was
God's first gift to the world.

Before discussing the prevention of blindness in adults, I wish to say a
few words concerning the attitude of oculists toward patients suffering
from eye diseases which, in all probability, will result in loss of
vision. If, for some special reason, the oculist fears it would be
unwise to tell the patient that blindness is imminent, he should at
least urge him to conserve his remaining vision, and advise him to do as
many things as possible by touch, and warn him of the consequences of
eyestrain. But, whenever possible, it is kinder to prepare the patient
for oncoming blindness, so that he may shape his life accordingly, and
may be induced to learn to read raised type, and use a writing device,
before the light is entirely gone. Most of us exclaim over our trifling
hurts, the mosquito bites of life, but when the real trial comes, when
we know we must face a great crisis, we square our shoulders, take a
long breath, and meet the inevitable with courage and fortitude. I wish
the oculists could hear as I do the despairing cry of men and women who
were led, until the very last, to hope for a restoration of eyesight,
and then told that in their particular case, all usual remedies failed.
Dr Daval, an eminent French oculist, who lost his eyesight at sixty,
makes an eloquent plea to his colleagues to tell their patients the
truth, and, instead of treating them when they know that loss of
eyesight is inevitable, advise them to study methods used by the blind,
even though they may not need to use the knowledge for months or even
years.

There are a number of eye diseases that may be inherited, and those
having such diseases should be told that they will transmit them to
helpless, innocent children. The social evil is largely responsible for
the infections of which ophthalmia neonatorum is only one result, but
since this disease comes so often from a cause which is not generally
discussed, it is particularly hard to combat. Forty per cent of existing
blindness, and a vast amount of physical degeneracy, is the direct
result of venereal causes.

Certain forms of glaucoma may be inherited, and children whose parents
have had this disease should watch their own eyes very carefully, since,
if taken in time, the progress of this disease, in certain forms, may be
arrested. Persons who see rings around the lights should heed the danger
signal and see an oculist.

Retinitis may also be inherited. I have known of three generations
becoming blind from this cause.

Nearsightedness may also be inherited. I have known this condition of
the eye to be present in four successive generations, and in the last
generation, the young woman became totally blind from detached retina,
due to excessive eyestrain while in school. If you could see my records,
and count the number of cases where blindness is given as the result of
straining nearsighted eyes, you would realize with me that progressive
myopia should be classed as one of the preventable eye diseases, and a
vigorous campaign waged against the marriage of persons so affected.
Nearsighted people should be especially careful to avoid eyestrain, and
should not work by artificial light. Bookkeepers, hotel clerks, and
women who do fine sewing at night should be cautioned against such work,
if they are myopic.

Optic atrophy is an eye disease very baffling to oculists, sapping the
vision slowly but surely, as a rule, but occasionally destroying
eyesight in a very short time. Electricians and those working in
chemical laboratories are susceptible to optic atrophy.

A common cause of eyestrain is reading on street cars, or using the
last, lingering bit of daylight to finish a chapter or complete some
fine work. It is easier to turn on the light than to spend years in the
dark.

The eyes of many people are ruined because, instead of going to an
oculist to have their eyes properly fitted to glasses, they go into a
ten-and-fifteen-cent store, try on a lot of cheap glasses, and purchase
the ones that magnify the best, and feel most comfortable on the nose.
The cheap varieties of glasses are often made from bits discarded by
opticians, and never intended to be used again. People are not always
careful in selecting eye shades, and often use those made of very
inflammable materials, which frequently catch fire, and destroy the
eyesight.

I can not understand how people can trifle with the most precious of
their physical possessions, and yet my records teem with such instances,
and the victims realize when too late how criminally thoughtless and
careless they were. Some of our grown-up children need instructions as
to the use and abuse of their eyes. In Los Angeles, I addressed the
various Parent-Teacher Associations on these important subjects, and I
believe that the note of warning sounded by one who is herself a victim
of unnecessary blindness, went straight home to every heart.

The percentage of adult blindness is increasing at a very rapid rate,
owing to the numerous accidents in factories and workshops, accidents
that are, in many instances, preventable. Owners of factories, quarries,
mines and other industrial plants have become alive to the necessity of
safeguarding the eyes of their operatives, and much needed legislation
is being enacted in all parts of the country. The National Council of
Safety, an organization in existence but five years, has accomplished a
great deal and this council co-operates with State Industrial Accident
Commissions, and with civic and social organizations. The National
Council of Safety estimates that there is one worker killed every 15
minutes, day and night, in the United States, and one injured every 15
seconds, day and night. This gives 30,000 killed and 2,000,000 injured,
and of this number 200,000 are eye injuries. The National Committee for
the Prevention of Blindness estimates that there are 100,000 blind in
the United States, and half this number are needlessly so. Mr Will C.
French of the State Industrial Accident Commission estimates that we
have 1,000,000 employees in the state, and we have 300 industrial
injuries daily, including Sundays. We thus have approximately 100,000
industrial accidents each year in this state. Since 1914, there were
23,451 eye injuries, and of these 549 were permanent injuries, and 11
resulted in total blindness. The medical and compensation costs of these
eye injuries will be about $788,000. The 11 blind call for life
pensions. The State Library home teachers are teaching 7 out of the 11
cases, and the Industrial Accident Commission is very glad to co-operate
with us.

In California we have an average of 26 eye injuries each working day,
and this number is likely to increase, especially in the shipbuilding
industry, because of the chipping steel, use of emery wheels, and
machinery in the construction of vessels. The State Accident Commission
advocates goggles, one pair to each man. There are four kinds of goggles
used. Those for the protection against flying material, for protection
against intense heat and light, for protection against gases, fumes and
liquids, and dust goggles. Masks are urged for welders and babbiters,
and these masks are so strongly constructed that they not only fit the
eye, but have shields at the sides of each lens to prevent the flying
chips from entering the eyes from the sides. In most of the large plants
there are committees of safety composed of employees, and they do much
to reduce industrial accidents. Precautionary leaflets are circulated
among the workmen, and attractive posters, printed in all languages, are
used. Some of these are very effective. One shows a man saying
"good-bye" to his wife and five little ones, and underneath is written,
"How could they do without you?" One of the best known slogans, and one
carrying conviction, is "You can see through glass goggles, but you
can't see through glass eyes."

Many trades and occupations have their well-recognized types of injury.
In the bottling works eyes are frequently lost through the impact of
popping corks. The bursting of unprotected water gauges caused many
cases of blindness yearly among engineers and machinists. In the
grinding trades eyes are frequently lost by bits of flying emery
becoming imbedded in the eyeball, and the Industrial Accident Commission
recommends iron or glass guards for emery wheels. In factories, quarries
and mines more serious damage is done by larger bits of metal or stone.
Sometimes harm is done in an attempt to remove the foreign body from
the eye, as the hands of the one performing this service may not be
clean, or the instrument used may be the corner of a soiled
handkerchief, a toothpick or match, or even, as sometimes happens, the
tongue. More eyes are injured from infection than from the presence of
foreign bodies, which, if properly and carefully removed, might result
only in temporary inconvenience and the loss of a few days work. Workmen
should not trust to the shop or factory doctor, but should go to the
company doctor at once. Immediate and competent care should be secured
without delay, and this will save eyes, and also save employers and
insurance companies a great deal of money.

Lime-burn, solder-burn, and all the so-called dusty trades produce
chronic inflammation of the eyes, which often results in total
blindness. The National Council of Safety enumerates fifty-five
industrial poisons, thirty-six of which affect the eyes. Absorption of
drugs often causes blindness--tobacco, wood alcohol, lead, used in so
many industries; bisulphide of carbon, used in making rubber;
nitro-benzol, used in the manufacture of explosives, and some of the
anilin dyes. Hoods and exhausts should be used to prevent the escape of
dangerous fumes, vapors and gases. For men exposed to great heat,
antisweat pencils have been manufactured, and when these are rubbed over
the goggles, the glass will remain clear of steam for hours. Special eye
coverings are designed for men working over acids, or in sand blasting.
One of our pupils, a man past fifty, who had worked in a creamery for
over twenty years, and who usually wore goggles when making tests with
sulphuric acid, neglected to take the precautionary measure one morning,
and some of the acid splashed up into his eyes. He is totally blind, and
must begin life all over again. There have been so many cases of
blindness as a result of dynamite explosions occurring in quarries and
mines, that laws have been enacted for the protection of workmen. When a
blast has been fired, and it is not certain that all the charges have
exploded, no person is permitted to enter the place until forty-five
minutes after the explosion. My records prove the great need for this
precautionary measure, and I only wish it had been enforced years ago,
before so many men in the prime of life had been deprived of eyesight,
and of earning capacity as well.

Improper lighting and ventilating in factories, shops and stores, and
work requiring excessive eyestrain, contributes to a long list of
disabilities often resulting in total blindness. The passage, by our
last Legislature, of the Common Towel Bill, prohibiting the use of
roller towels anywhere in the state, has removed one of the most
flagrant causes of infection, and one to which very little attention was
paid by factory workers generally. I know one young man and two young
women whose total blindness is the result of infection from the use of a
roller towel.

I trust all these facts and figures may not prove wearisome, for it is
necessary to know them if you are to realize the extent of the work
being done here and elsewhere to prevent blindness and conserve vision.
I have not mentioned all the activities of the State Industrial Accident
Commission, or the National Council of Safety, but a visit to the Safety
Museum, 525 Market street, San Francisco, or to the Union League
Building, Los Angeles, will enlighten you further as to the progress of
the Safety First movement, and convince you of the wisdom and humanity
of it. Let us adopt prevention and conservation as household words; let
us do our share in spreading the gospel, and soon we shall have fewer
blind babies, fewer children sitting on the side lines, and fewer men
and women deprived of eyesight at the floodtide of life. This is another
of my dreams, and this one is already coming true. "Let there be light!"
was the first recorded utterance of the Most High God. "Let there be
light!" has been the watchword on the lips of human progress during all
the centuries that have gone, and they must be the battle-cry of
Progress during all the centuries that are to come. I am sure we shall
all be glad to do our share to preserve this light for our own and
future generations.





End of Project Gutenberg's Five Lectures on Blindness, by Kate M. Foley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIVE LECTURES ON BLINDNESS ***

***** This file should be named 22170.txt or 22170.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/1/7/22170/

Produced by Bryan Ness, Janet Blenkinship and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
