The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Essence of Buddhism, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Essence of Buddhism

Author: Various

Editor: E. Haldeman-Julius

Release Date: April 21, 2006 [EBook #18223]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ESSENCE OF BUDDHISM ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Sankar Viswanathan,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









                    TEN CENT POCKET SERIES NO. 325

                     Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius



                            The Essence of
                               Buddhism




                       HALDEMAN-JULIUS COMPANY
                            GIRARD, KANSAS


                           Copyright, 1922.

                       Haldeman-Julius Company.




PREFACE.


I am glad to be permitted thus to say, in a few words of introduction
to this well-meditated little volume, how pleasant and how profitable
an idea it must be considered to have designed and compiled a Buddhist
anthology. Selecting his cut and uncut jewels from very various
Buddhistic sources, Mr. Bowden has here supplied those who buy and use
the book with rubies and sapphires and emeralds of wisdom, compassion,
and human brotherhood, any one of which, worn on the heart, would be
sufficient to make the wearer rich beyond estimation for a day. The
author disclaims any attempt to set forth a corpus of Buddhistic
morality and doctrine, nor, indeed, would anything of the kind be
possible within such narrow limits; but I rejoice to observe how well
and faithfully his manifold extracts from the Sacred Books of India
and the East exhibit that ever-pervading tenderness of the great
Asiatic Teacher, which extended itself to all alike that live. This
compassionateness of Gautama, if nothing else had been illustrated by
the collection, would render it precious to possess and fruitful to
employ; but many another lofty tenet of the "Light" of Asia finds
illumination in some brief verse or maxim as day after day glides by;
and he who should mark the passage of the months with these simple
pages must become, I think, a better man at the year's end than at
its beginning. I recommend this compilation without hesitation or
reserve.

EDWIN ARNOLD.




COMPILER'S PROEM.

E. M. BOWDEN.


In this compilation no attempt has been made to present a general view
of Buddhism as a religious or philosophical system. The aim has rather
been to turn Buddhism to account as a moral force by bringing together
a selection of its beautiful sentiments, and lofty maxims, and
particularly including some of those which inculcate mercy to the
lower animals.

On this point a far higher stand is taken by Buddhism than by
Christianity--or at any rate than by Christianity as understood and
interpreted by those who ought to know. Not only is the whole question
of our duties to the lower animals commonly ignored in Christian works
as, for instance, in the famous Imitation of Christ, and scores of
others; but, as if this were not enough, a reasoned attempt has
actually been made, on the strength of Christian teaching, to explode
the notion that animals have any right (e.g., in Moral Philosophy, by
Father Joseph Rickaby). Very different in this respect is the tone of
the average Buddhist treatise, with its earnest exhortations,
recurring as a matter of course, to show mercy on every living thing;
and this difference alone is an adequate reason for compiling a
Buddhist anthology.

In regard to the sources quoted from, considerable latitude seemed
allowable. They do not all, by any means, possess canonical authority.
But they are all distinctly Buddhist in character. The supposed dates
of the originals range from at least the third century B. C. to
medieval and later times.

Hence, it is clear that, should any one think to make use of
quotations from this work for controversial purposes, a certain degree
of caution will be necessary. The context of the passage, and the date
and the authorship of the original work, may all need to be taken into
account; while it must also be borne in mind that the religious terms,
such as "heaven" and "sin," which have to be employed in English, do
not always correspond exactly to the Buddhist conception.

Of the numerous Buddhist works which have now been translated from
some eight or ten eastern languages, the greater number, when regarded
purely as literature, occupy a very low level. At times they are so
remarkably dull and silly that the reader is inclined to ask why they
were ever translated. But the one redeeming feature in the voluminous
compositions of Buddhist writers is the boundless compassion which
they consistently inculcate.

The insertion of a passage in these pages does not necessarily imply
that the compiler accepts in its entirety the teaching it conveys.
Concerning that oft-repeated injunction, not to kill any living
creature whatsoever, we can hardly doubt that there are many cases in
which to take life, provided it is taken painlessly, not only is not
on the whole an unkindness, but is an act of beneficence. If we
sometimes give to this injunction the sense of extending our sympathy
to the lowest sentient being, and not causing pain to living creatures
while they live, we shall perhaps not be doing violence to the spirit
of mercy by which it was prompted. There are many passages in Buddhist
works which advocate preference for the spirit over the letter, or the
exercise of judgment in accepting what we are taught.

A few passages, though not many, have been included more because they
are striking or poetical than for the sake of their moral teaching.

As the references given are mostly to the Oriental origins, it is only
fair to insert here a list of the English and French translations
which have been principally used in compiling this book. The following
works comprise most of those which have proved directly of service for
the purpose--"Sacred Books of the East," namely:

     Vol. 10. Dhammapada, by F. Max Muller; and Sutta-Nipata, by V.
     Fausboll.

     Vol. 11. Buddhist Suttas, by T. W. Rhys Davids.

     Vol. 13. Vinaya Texts, part 1, by T. W. Rhys Davids and H.
     Oldenberg.

     Vol. 17. Vinaya Texts, part 2, by T. W. Rhys Davids and H.
     Oldenberg.

     Vol. 19. Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king, by Rev. S. Beal.

     Vol. 20. Vinaya Texts, part 3, by T. W. Rhys Davids and H.
     Oldenberg.

     Vol. 21. Saddharma-pundarika, by H. Kern.

     Vol. 35. Questions of King Milinda, part 1, by T. W. Rhys Davids.

     Vol. 36. Questions of King Milinda, part 2, by T. W. Rhys Davids.

     Vol. 49. Buddhist Mahayana Texts, by E. B. Cowell, F. Max Muller,
     and J. Takakusu.

     "Sacred Books of the Buddhists," namely:
     Vol. 1. Jatakamala, by J. S. Speyer.
     Vol. 2. Dialogues of the Buddha, by T. W. Rhys Davids.

     The Jataka, or Stories of the Buddha's Former Births, translated
     under the editorship of Professor E. B. Cowell.

     Buddhism of Tibet, by L. A. Waddell.

     Buddhism in Translations, by H. C. Warren.

     Travels of Fa-hien, by James Legge.

     Selected Essays, by F. Max Muller.

     Buddhist Birth Stories, or Jataka Tales, by T. W. Rhys Davids.

     Hibbert Lectures for 1881, by T. W. Rhys Davids.

     Buddhism, by T. W. Rhys Davids.

     Catena of Buddhist Scriptures from the Chinese, by Rev. S. Beal.

     Abstract of Four Lectures on Buddhist Literature in China, by Rev.
     S. Beal.

     Romantic Legend of Sakya Buddha, by Rev. S. Beal.

     Texts from the Buddhist Canon known as Dhammapada, by Rev. S. Beal.

     Udanavarga, by W. W. Rockhill.

     Lalita Vistara, by Rajendralala Mitra.

     Sanskrit Buddhist Literature of Nepal, by Rajendralala Mitra.

     Mahavamsa, by L. C. Wijesinha.

     Attanagalu-vansa, by James D'Alwis.

     Archaeological Survey of Southern India (new series of reports),
     vol. 1, by James Burgess, with translations by Georg Buhler.

     Archaeological Survey of Western India, vol. 4, by James Burgess.

     Sutta-Nipata, by Sir M. Coomara Swamy.

     Katha Sarit Sagara, by C. H. Tawney.

     Grammar of the Tibetan Language, by A. Csoma de Koros.

     Nagananda: a Buddhist Drama, by Palmer Boyd.

     Buddhaghosa's Parables, by Capt. T. Rogers.

     Light of Asia, by Sir Edwin Arnold.

     Ancient Proverbs and Maxims from Burmese Sources, by James Gray.

     Jinalankara, or Embellishments of Buddha, by James Gray.

     We-than-da-ya: a Buddhist Legend, by L. Allan Goss.

     The English Governess at the Siamese Court, by Mrs. A. H.
     Leonowens.

     The Catechism of the Shamans, by C. F. Neumann.

     View of the History, Literature, and Religion of the Hindoos, by
     Rev. W. Ward.

     Horace Sinicae: Translations from the Popular Literature of the
     Chinese, by Rev. Robert Morrison.

     Contemporary Review for February, 1876.

     Cornhill Magazine for August, 1876.

     The Buddhist, vol. 1.

     Journal of Pali Text Society for 1886.

     Journal of Buddhist Text Society of India, vols. 1, 3, 4 and 5.

     Journal of Royal Asiatic Society, new series, vol. 2; also vol. for
     1894.

     Journal of Ceylon Branch of Royal Asiatic Society, No. 2.

     Journal of Asiatic Society of Bengal, Vol. 36.

     Transactions of Asiatic Society of Japan, vol. 22.

     Journal of American Oriental Society, vol. 4.

     Journal Asiatique, septieme serie, vols. 17, 19 and 20.

     Lalita Vistara, by P. E. Foucaux.

     La Guirlande Pricieuse des Demandes et des Responses, by P. E.
     Foucaux.

     Sept Suttas Palis, tires du Dighanikaya, by P. Grimblot.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ESSENCE OF BUDDHISM.


All beings desire happiness; therefore to all extend your
benevolence.--Mahavamsa.

Because he has pity upon every living creature, therefore is a man
called "holy."--Dhammapada.

Like as a mother at the risk of her life watches over her only child,
so also let every one cultivate towards all beings a boundless
(friendly) mind.--Metta-sutta.

Hurt not others with that which pains yourself.--Udanavarga.

I cannot have pleasure while another grieves and I have power to help
him.--Jatakamala.

With pure thoughts and fulness of love, I will do towards others what
I do for myself.--Lalita Vistara.

If you desire to do something pleasing to me, then desist from hunting
forever! The poor poor beasts of the forest, being ... dull of
intellect, are worthy of pity for this very reason.--Jatakamala.

You will generously follow the impulse of pity, I hope.--Jatakamala.

    For that they hated this poor slender boy,
    That ever frowned upon their barbarous sports,
    And loved the beasts they tortured in their play,
    And wept to see the wounded hare, or doe,
    Or trout that floundered on the angler's hook.

--Lloyd "Nichiren."

Good men melt with compassion even for one who has wrought them
harm.--Kshemendra's Avadana Kalpalata.

Though a man with a sharp sword should cut one's body bit by bit, let
not an angry thought ... arise, let the mouth speak no ill
word.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Them who became thy murderers, thou forgavest.--Lalita Vistara.

Overcome evil by good.--Udanavarga.

Conquer your foe by force, and you increase his enmity; conquer by
love, and you reap no after-sorrow.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

This great principle of returning good for evil.--Sutra of Forty-two
Sections.

The member of Buddha's order ... should not intentionally destroy the
life of any being, down even to a worm or an ant.--Mahavagga.

Whether now any man kill with his own hand, or command any other to
kill, or whether he only see with pleasure the act of killing--all is
equally forbidden by this law.--Sha-mi-lu-i-yao-lio.

My teaching is this, that the slightest act of charity, even in the
lowest class of persons, such as saving the life of an insect out of
pity, that this act ... shall bring to the doer of it consequent
benefit.--T'sa-ho-hom-king.

He came to remove the sorrows of all living
things.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

"Now (said he) I will see a noble law, unlike the worldly methods
known to men, ... and will fight against the chief wrought upon man by
sickness, age, and death."--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

To a righteous man death must bring gladness. For no fear of mishap
exists for him who is devoted to a holy life.--Jatakamala.

He lives only to be a help to others.--Questions of King Milinda.

Why should we cling to this perishable body? In the eye of the wise, the
only thing it is good for is to benefit one's fellow-creatures.--Katha
Sarit Sagara.

Is not all I possess, even to my very body, kept for the benefit of
others?--Nagananda.

All men should cultivate a fixed and firm determination, and vow that what
they once undertake they will never give up.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Rather will I fall headlong into hell ... than do a deed that is
unworthy.--Jataka.

May my body be ground to powder small as the mustard-seed if I ever
desire to (break my vow)!--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Happy is he that is virtuous--Dhammapada.

To make an end of selfishness is happiness.--Udanavarga.

There is no happiness except in righteousness.--Attanagalu-vansa.

Full of love for all things in the world, practicing virtue in order
to benefit others--this man only is happy.--Fa-kheu-pi-u.

He that loveth iniquity beckoneth to misfortune.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

Watch your thoughts.--Dhammapada.

Control your tongue.--Dhammapada.

Have a strict control over your passions.--Story of Sundari and Nanda.

The higher life maketh he known, in all its purity and in all its
perfectness.--Tevijja-sutta.

So imbued were they with lovingkindness that all the birds and animals
loved them and harmed them not.--Sama Jataka (Burmese version).

Compassionate and kind to all creatures that have
life.--Brahma-jala-sutta.

    The birds and beasts and creeping things--'tis writ--
    Had sense of Buddha's vast embracing love,
    And took the promise of his piteous speech.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

He cherished the feeling of affection for all beings as if they were
his only son.--Lalita Vistara.

    Closely as cause and effect are bound together,
    So do two loving hearts entwine and live--
    Such is the power of love to join in one.

--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

                That thou mayst know--
    What others will not--that I love thee most
    Because I loved so well all living souls.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

Always give in charity to people of good conduct.--Jatakamala.

With every desire to do good, the ignorant and foolish only succeed in
doing harm.... 'Tis knowledge crowns endeavor with success.--Jataka.

There is no sweet companion like pure charity.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Almsgiving, it is said, constitutes the value of riches.--Jatakamala.

Good is restraint in all things.--Dhammapada.

Unselfishness, true, and self-control.--Jataka.

The religious mendicant, wisely reflecting, is patient under cold and
heat, under hunger and thirst, ... under bodily sufferings, under
pains however sharp.--Sabbasava-sutta.

Though a man conquer a thousand thousand men in battle, a greater
conqueror still is he who conquers himself.--Udanavarga.

Root out the love of self.--Jataka.

The man of honor should minister to his friends ... by liberality,
courtesy, benevolence, and by doing to them as he would be done
by.--Sigalovada-sutta.

Practice the art of "giving up."--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Speak not harshly to anybody.--Dhammapada.

May I speak kindly and softly to every one I chance to
meet.--Inscription in Temple of Nakhon Vat.

Offensive language is harsh even to the brutes.--Suttavaddhananiti.

Courtesy is the best ornament. Beauty  without courtesy is like a
grove without flowers.--Buddha-charita.

He knew not the art of hypocrisy.--Jatakamala.

Let a man say that which is right, not that which is unrighteous, ...
that which is pleasing, not that which is unpleasing, ... that which
is true, not that which is false.--Subhasita-sutta.

As he who loves life avoids poison, so let the sage avoid
sinfulness.--Udanavarga.

He sees danger in even the least of those things he should
avoid.--Tevijja-sutta.

Sin easily develops.--Rock Inscriptions of Asoka.

May I never do, nor cause to be done, nor contemplate the doing of,
even the most trivial sin!--Attanagalu-vansa (conclusion).

Let not one who is asked for his pardon withhold it.--Mahavagga.

'T is wrong to conquer him who sues for mercy.--Lalita Vistara.

Let none out of anger or resentment wish harm to
another.--Metta-sutta.

Let us then live happily, not hating those who hate us. In the midst
of those who hate us, let us dwell free from hatred.--Dhammapada.

For hatred does not cease by hatred at any time; hatred ceases by
love; this is an old rule.--Dhammapada.

(To the) self-reliant there is strength and
joy.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Let him not grieve for that which is lost.--Attadanda-sutta.

Not from weeping or grieving will any obtain peace of
mind.--Salla-sutta.

At first my sorrowing heart was heavy; but now my sorrow has brought
forth only profit.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Give to him that asketh, even though it be but a little.--Udanavarga.

He delights in giving so far as he is able.--Questions of King
Milinda.

Your guileless heart loves to exercise its
charity.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Always intent on bringing about the good and the happiness of
others.--Jatakamala.

Earnestly practice every good work.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

If they may cause by it the happiness of others, even pain is highly
esteemed by the righteous, as if it were gain.--Jatakamala.

When pure rules of conduct are observed, then there is true
religion.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Wherein does religion consist?

In (committing) the least possible harm, in (doing) abundance of good,
in (the practice of) pity, love, truth, and likewise purity of
life.--Pillar Inscriptions of Asoka.

(Not superstitious rites, but) kindness to slaves and servants,
reverence towards venerable persons, self-control with respect to
living creatures, ... these and similar (virtuous actions are the
rites which ought indeed to be performed.)--Rock Inscriptions of
Asoka.

The practice of religion involves as a first principle a loving,
compassionate heart for all creatures.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Shall we in worshipping slay that which hath life? This is like those
who practice wisdom, and the way of religious abstraction, but neglect
the rules of moral conduct.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

How can a system requiring the infliction of misery on other beings be
called a religious system?... To seek a good by doing an evil is
surely no safe plan.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

    Unto the dumb lips of his flock he lent
    Sad pleading words, showing how man, who prays
    For mercy to the gods, is merciless.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

I then will ask you, if a man, in worshipping ... sacrifices a sheep, and
so does well, wherefore not his child, ... and so do better? Surely ...
there is no merit in killing a sheep!--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

                    Nor [shall one] lay
    Upon the brow of innocent bound beasts
    One hair's weight of that answer all must give
    For all things done amiss or wrongfully.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

    Doing no injury to any one,
    Dwell in the world full of love and kindness.

--Questions of King Milinda.

    Ministering to the worthy, doing harm to none,
    Always ready to render reverence to whom it is due.
    Loving righteousness and righteous conversation,
    Ever willing to hear what may profit another.

--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

    Scrupulously avoiding all wicked actions;
    Reverently performing all virtuous ones;
    Purifying his intention from all selfish ends:
    This is the doctrine of all the Buddhas.

--Siau-chi-kwan.

Instruct yourself (more and more) in the highest
morality.--Nagarjuna's "Friendly Epistle."

Cultivate compassion.--Visuddhi-Magga.

May my thoughts, now small and narrow, expand in the next existence,
that I may understand the precepts ... thoroughly, and never break
them or be guilty of trespasses.--Inscription in Temple of Nakhon Vat.

Religion he looks upon as his best ornament.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The sinner is never beautiful.--Lalita Vistara.

Use no perfume but sweetness of thoughts.--Siamese Buddhist Maxim.

Wealth and beauty, scented flowers and ornaments like these, are not
to be compared for grace with moral rectitude!--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He who ... cannot feel joy to see merit in others is stained with the
darkness of sin.--Story of Pratiharyya.

Ask not of (a person's) descent, but ask about his
conduct--Sundarikabharadvaja-sutta.

The young man Vasettha said: "When one is virtuous and full of (good)
works, in this way he becomes a Brahman."--Vasettha-sutta.

Not by birth does one become low caste, not by birth a Brahman; by his
deeds he becomes low caste, by his deeds he becomes a
Brahman.--Vasala-sutta.

Whosoever strikes, or by words annoys, mother or father, brother or
sister, ... let us know such as a "base-born."--Vasala-sutta.

Causing destruction to living beings, killing and mutilating, ...
stealing and speaking falsely, fraud and deception, ... these are
(what defile a man).--Amagandha-sutta.

Whosoever ... harms living beings, ... and in whom there is no
compassion for them, let us know such as a "base-born."--Vasala-sutta.

In whom there is truth and righteousness, he is blessed, he is a
Brahman.--Dhammapada.

Whoso hurts not (living) creatures, whether those that tremble or
those that are strong, nor yet kills nor causes to be killed, him do I
call a Brahman.--Vasettha-sutta.

Whoso is (entirely) divested of sin, as is the heaven of mire and the
moon of dust, him do I call a Brahman.--Udanavarga.

Him I call indeed a Brahman who, though he be guilty of no offense,
patiently endures reproaches, bonds, and stripes.--Dhammapada.

We will patiently suffer threats and blows at the hands of foolish
men.--Saddharma-pundarika.

Who, though he be cursed by the world, yet cherishes no ill-will
towards it.--Sammaparibbajaniya-sutta.

Persecutions and revilings, murders and numberless imprisonments,
these hast thou suffered in thousands from the world, verily
delighting in long-suffering.--Lalita Vistara.

At the end of life the soul goes forth alone; whereupon only our good
deeds befriend us.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The wrongdoer, devoid of rectitude, ... is full of anxiety when death
arrives.--Mahaparinibbana-sutta.

He who has done what is right is free from fear.--Udanavarga.

No fear has any one of me; neither have I fear of any one: in my
good-will to all I trust.--Introduction to the Jataka.

Our deeds, whether good or evil, ... follow us as
shadows.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

    He who now gives in charity
    Shall surely reap where he has given;
    For whosoever piously bestows a little water
    Shall receive return like the great ocean.

--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Covetous desire is the greatest (source of) sorrow. Appearing as a
friend, in secret 'tis our enemy.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

That which is given in charity is rich in returns; therefore charity is
a true friend; although it scatters it brings no
remorse.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He who stints the profit he has made, his wealth will soon be spent
and lost.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The (real) treasure is that laid up ... through charity and piety,
temperance and self-control.... The treasure thus hid is secure, and
passes not away. Though he leave the fleeting riches of the world,
this a man carries with him--a treasure that no wrong of others, and
no thief, can steal.--Nidhikanda-sutta.

Think of all sentient beings as thy children.--Tenets of the Soto
Sect.

Though exalted, forget not the lowly.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

Be kind to all that lives.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Filled with compassion for all creatures.--Saddharma-pundarika.

Of all possessions, contentedness is the best by far.--Nagarjuna's
"Friendly Epistle."

A contented mind is always joyful.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Let us then live happily, though we call nothing our own.--Dhammapada.

    Not the whole world, ... the ocean-girt earth,
    With all the seas and the hills that girdle it,
    Would I wish to possess with shame added thereto.

--Questions of King Milinda.

Let none be forgetful of his own duty for the sake of
another's.--Dhammapada.

The faults of others are easily seen; one's own faults are difficult
to see.--Udanavarga.

Self-examination is painful.--Pillar Inscriptions of Asoka.

A man winnows his neighbor's faults like chaff: his own he hides, as a
cheat the bad die from the gambler.--Dhammapada.

She orders her household aright, she is hospitable to kinsmen and
friends, a chaste wife, a thrifty housekeeper, skilful and diligent in
all her duties.--Sigalovada-sutta.

The wife ... should be cherished by her husband.--Sigalovada-sutta.

Were I not ready to suffer adversity with my husband as well as to
enjoy happiness with him, I should be no true wife.--Legend of
We-than-da-ya.

It is better to die in righteousness than to live in
unrighteousness.--Loweda Sangrahaya.

Better to fling away life than transgress our convictions of
duty.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Better for me to die battling (with the temper) than that I should
live defeated.--Padhana-sutta.

The loving Father of all that lives.--Tsing-tu-wan.

Our loving Father, and Father of all that breathes.--Daily Manual of
the Shaman.

Even so of all things that have ... life, there is not one that (the
Buddhist anchorite) passes over; ... he looks upon all with ...
deep-felt love. This, verily, ... is the way to a state of union with
God.--Tevijja-sutta.

    Doubts will exist as long as we live in the world.
    Yet, pursuing with joy the road of virtue,
    Like the man who observes the rugged path along the precipice, we ought
    Gladly and profitably to follow it.

--Siau-chi-kwan.

To feed a single good man is infinitely greater in point of merit,
than attending to questions about heaven and earth, spirits and
demons, such as occupy ordinary men.--Sutra of Forty-two Sections.

What is goodness? First and foremost the agreement of the will with
the conscience.--Sutra of Forty-two Sections.

If you remove (from conduct) the purpose of the mind, the bodily act
is but as rotten wood. Wherefore regulate the mind, and the body of
itself will go right.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Keep watch over your hearts.--Mahaparinibbana-sutta.

Let no evil desire whatever arise within you.--Cullavagga.

So soon as there springs up within him an angry, malicious thought,
some sinful, wrong disposition, ... he puts it away, removes it,
destroys it, he makes it not to be.--Sabbasava-sutta.

With not a thought of selfishness or covetous
desire.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Covetousness and anger are as the serpent's
poison.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

They who do evil go to hell; they who are righteous go to
heaven.--Dhammapada.

He who, doing what he ought, ... gives pleasure to others, shall find
joy in the other world.--Udanavarga.

The virtuous (when injured) grieve not so much for their own pain as
for the loss of happiness incurred by their injurers.--Jatakamala.

    He truly must have a loving heart,
    For all things living place in him entire confidence.

--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

    Ofttimes while he mused--as motionless
    As the fixed rock his seat--the squirrel leaped
    Upon his knee, the timid quail led forth
    Her brood between his feet, and blue doves pecked
    The rice-grains from the bowl beside his hand.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

Those who search after truth should have a heart full of
sympathy.--Story of Virudhaka.

This (prince) feels for the welfare of the multitude.--Nalaka-sutta.

The Royal Prince, perceiving the tired oxen, ... the men toiling
beneath the midday sun, and the birds devouring the hapless insects,
his heart was filled with grief, as a man would feel upon seeing his
own household bound in fetters: thus was he touched with sorrow for
the whole family of sentient creatures--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

This king felt the weal and the woe of his subjects as his
own.--Jatakamala.

What is a true gift?
One for which nothing is expected in return.--Prasnottaramalika.

There is a way of giving, seeking pleasure by it (or) coveting to get
more; some also give to gain a name for charity, some to gain the
happiness of heaven.... But yours, O friend, is a charity free from
such thoughts, the highest and best degree of charity, free from
self-interest or thought of getting more.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

'Tis thus men generally think and speak, they have a reference in all they
do to their own advantage. But with this one it is not so: 'tis the good of
others and not his own that he seeks.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Above all things be not careless; for carelessness is the great foe to
virtue.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

You say that while young a man should be gay, and when old then
religious.... Death, however, as a robber, sword in hand, follows us
all, desiring to capture his prey: how then should we wait for old
age, ere we turn our minds to religion?--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

If you urge that I am young and tender, and that the time for seeking
wisdom is not yet, then you should know that to seek true religion,
there never is a time not fit.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Work out your own salvation with diligence.--Mahaparinibbana-sutta.

No man can purify another.--Dhammapada.

The good man's love ends in love; the bad man's love in
hate.--Kshemendra's Kalpalata.

He who holds up a torch to (lighten) mankind is always honored by
me.--Rahula-sutta.

Where there is uprightness, wisdom is there, and where there is
wisdom, uprightness is there.--Sonadanda-sutta.

Liberty, courtesy, benevolence, unselfishness, under all circumstances
towards all people--these qualities are to the world what the linchpin
is to the rolling chariot.--Sigalovada-sutta.

Let us be knit together ... as friends.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Since even animals can live together in mutual reverence, confidence,
and courtesy, much more should you, O Brethren, so let your light
shine forth that you ... may be seen to dwell in like manner
together.--Cullavagga.

Trust is the best of relationships.--Dhammapada.

Faithful and trustworthy, he injures not his fellow-man by
deceit.--Tevijja-sutta.

Worship consists in fulfilling the design (of the person honored), not
in offerings of perfumes, garlands, and the like.--Jatakamala.

Compassion for all creatures is the true religion.--Buddha-charita.

The wise firmly believe that in Mercy the whole of Righteousness is
contained. What virtue ... does there exist which is not the
consequence of Mercy?--Jatakamala.

Even if a man have done evil a hundred times, let him not do it
again.--Udanavarga.

He who, having been angered, gives way to anger no more, has achieved
a mighty victory.--Udanavarga.

Better than sovereignty over this earth, ... better than lordship over
all worlds, is the recompense of the first step in holiness.--Dhammapada.

Now many distinguished warriors thought: we who go (to war) and find
our delight in fighting, do evil.... What shall we do that we may
cease from evil and do good?--Mahavagga.

Victory breeds hatred.--Dhammapada.

Therefore has this pious inscription been carved here (on the rock),
to the end that posterity may not suppose that any further conquest
ought to be made by them. Let them not hold that conquest by the sword
is worthy the name of conquest; let them see in it only confusion and
violence. Let them reckon as true conquests none save the triumphs of
religion.--Rock Inscriptions of Asoka.

He walks not in religion in a quarrelsome spirit.--Questions of King
Milinda.

Nay, ... let not quarrel arise, nor strife, nor discord, nor
dispute.--Mahavagga.

Thus he lives as a binder together of those who are divided, an
encourager of those who are friends, a peace-maker, a lover of peace,
impassioned for peace, a speaker of words that make for
peace.--Tevijja-sutta.

It is not as a means of procuring my own happiness that I give in charity,
but I love charity that I may do good to the world.--Jatakamala.

Benevolence is the doing of righteous acts of help to living creatures
whether of high or low degree; as when we help a tortoise in trouble,
or a sick sparrow, without looking for any reward.--Tenets of the Soto
Sect.

'Tis out of mercy, not with the desire of gain, that the virtuous take
care of a person in distress, nor do they mind whether the other
understands this or not.--Jatakamala.

Let him that has a merciful character be my friend.--Bhakti Sataka.

If a man thus walks in the ways of compassion, is it possible that he
should hurt anything intentionally?--Sha-mi-lu-i-yao-lio.

Living in the world, and doing no harm to aught that
lives.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

As he said so he acted.--Vangisa-sutta.

Those who have sin at heart, but are sweet of speech, are like a
pitcher smeared with nectar, but full of poison.--Lalita Vistara.

Like a ... flower that is rich in color, but has no scent, so are the
fine ... words of him who does not act accordingly.--Dhammapada.

The mind must be brought under perfect subjection.--Inscription on
Votive Images.

He whose mind is subdued and perfectly controlled is
happy.--Udanavarga.

If only the thoughts be directed to that which is right, then
happiness must necessarily follow.--Fa-kheu-pi-u.

Evil he overcame by righteousness.--Questions of King Milinda.

He felt compassion towards those who tormented him.--Attanagalu-vansa.

The bearer of ill-will towards them that bear ill-will can never
become pure; but he who bears no ill-will pacifies them that
hate.--Udanavarga.

The man who foolishly does me wrong, I will return him the protection
of my ungrudging love.--Sutra of Forty-two Sections.

Whether of the higher class of beings, as ... a perfect man, ... or of the
lower class of beings, as a grasshopper or the smallest insect--in one
word, whatever hath life thou shalt not kill.--Sha-mi-lu-i-yao-lio.

To whom even the life of a serpent is sacred.--Lalita Vistara.

I love living things that have no feet, ... four-footed creatures, and
things with many feet.... May all creatures, all things that live, all
beings of whatever kind, may they all behold good fortune.--Cullavagga.

You do not well enticing me to a sinful act. And what you say, that
"nobody else will know of it"--will it be less sinful for this
reason?--Jatakamala.

There is no such thing as secrecy in wrongdoing.--Jataka.

Even could she have kept it secret from men, ... could she have kept
it secret from spirit, ... could she have kept it secret from the
gods, yet she could not have escaped herself from the knowledge of her
sin.--Questions of King Milinda.

Clad in garments pure as the moonbeams, ... her ornaments modesty and
virtuous conduct.--Ajanta Cave Inscriptions.

If you speak ... to a woman, do it with pureness of heart.... Say to
yourself: "Placed in this sinful world, let me be as the spotless
lily, unsoiled by the mire in which it grows." Is she old? regard her
as your mother. Is she honorable? as your sister. Is She of small
account? as a younger sister. Is she a child? then treat her with
reverence and politeness.--Sutra of Forty-two Sections.

    Gentle and true, simple and kind was she,
    Noble of mien, with gracious speech to all,
    And gladsome looks--a pearl of womanhood.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

Do not have evil-doers for friends.... Take as your friends the best
of men.--Dhammapada.

    Briefly I will tell you the marks of a friend--
    When doing wrong, to warn; when doing well, to exhort to perseverance;
    When in difficulty or danger, to assist, relieve, and deliver.
    Such a man is indeed a true and illustrious friend.

--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

His friendship is prized by the gentle and the
good.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Living ... without cruelty among the cruel.--Udanavarga.

The Scripture said: "Be kind and benevolent to every being, and spread
peace in the world.... If it happen that thou see anything to be
killed, thy soul shall be moved with pity and compassion. Ah, how
watchful should we be over ourselves!"--Sha-mi-lu-i-yao-lio.

I desire to produce in myself a loving heart towards all living
creatures.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Let us then practice good works, and inspect our thoughts that we do
no evil.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Now, therefore, it behooves me to examine into my faults; and if I
find anything wrong in me, to put it away, and practice virtue
only.--Jataka.

Therefore ... we would humble ourselves and repent us of our sins. Oh!
that we may have strength to do so aright!--Liturgy of Kwan-yin.

If we know that we have done wrong, and yet refuse to acknowledge it,
we are guilty of prevarication.--Chinese Pratimoksha.

From the very first, ... having no wish to benefit others, or to do
good in the least degree, we have been adding sin unto sin; and even
though our actual crimes have not been so great, yet a wicked heart
has ruled us within. Day and night, without interval or hesitation,
have we continually contrived how to do wrong.--Liturgy of Kwan-yin.

Accept the confession I make of my sin in its sinfulness, to the end
that in future I may restrain myself therefrom.--Cullavagga.

He who offends an offenseless man, ... against such a fool the evil
reverts, like fine dust thrown against the wind.--Kokaliya-sutta.

May wisdom be with me always.--Inscription in Temple of Nakhon Vat.

The fool who knows his foolishness is wise at any rate so far. But the
fool who thinks himself wise, he is a fool indeed.--Dhammapada.

He who holds back rising anger like a rolling chariot--him I call a
real driver: other people are merely holding the reins.--Dhammapada.

Anger, alas! how it changes the comely face! how it destroys the
loveliness of beauty!--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The fool who is angered, and thinks to triumph by the use of abusive
language, is always vanquished by him whose words are patient.--Udanavarga.

He who lives far from me yet walks righteously, is ever near
me.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He sought after the good of those dependent on him.--Questions of King
Milinda.

Who, though he be lord over others, is patient with those that are
weak.--Udanavarga.

Loving her maids and dependents even as herself.--Lalita Vistara.

Loving all things which live even as themselves.--Sir Edwin Arnold.

Hear ye all this moral maxim, and having heard it keep it well: Whatsoever
is displeasing to yourselves never do to another.--Bstanhgyur.

Then declared he unto them (the rule of doing to others what we
ourselves like).--San-kiao-yuen-lieu.

From henceforth ... put away evil and do good.--Jataka.

At morning, noon, and night successively, store up good
works.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Always doing good to those around you.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

In order to terminate all suffering, be earnest in performing good
deeds.--Buddhaghosa's parables.

Compassion alone sanctifies the good.--Kshemendra's Avadana Kalpalata.

Religion means self-sacrifice.--Rukemavati.

O Buddha, the worship of thee consists in doing good to the
world.--Bhakti Sataka.

Persist not in calling attention to a matter calculated to cause
division.--Patimokkha.

Dwell together in mutual love.--Brahmanadhammika-sutta.

Let us now unite in the practice of what is good, cherishing a gentle
and sympathizing heart, and carefully cultivating good faith and
righteousness.--Travels of Fa-hien.

May I obtain wealth, and ... may the wealth ... obtained by me be for
the benefit of others.--Jinalankara.

Feeling deep compassion for the poor, grudging nothing which he
possessed.--Phu-yau-king.

Humble in mind, but large in gracious deeds, abundant in charity to
the poor and helpless.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Full of modesty and pity, ... kind and compassionate to all creatures
that have life.--Tevijja-sutta.

He who ... is tender to all that lives ... is protected by heaven and
loved by men.--Fa-kheu-pi-u.

Day and night the mind of Buddha's disciples always delights in
compassion.--Dhammapada.

Let him not think detractingly of others.--Sariputta-sutta.

But offer loving thoughts and acts to all.--Sir Edwin Arnold.

Never should he speak a disparaging word of
anybody.--Saddharma-pundarika.

Whatever I understand (to be right) ... I desire to practice.--Rock
Inscriptions of Asoka.

Lightly to laugh at and ridicule another is wrong.--Fa-kheu-pi-us.

Virtuous deeds should be practiced today; for who can say but we may
die tomorrow?--Temee Jatu.

May I be thoroughly imbued with benevolence, and show always a
charitable disposition, till such time as this heart shall cease to
beat.--Inscription in Temple of Nakhon Vat.

Born to give joy and bring peace to the world.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

The whole world of sentient creatures enjoyed ... universal
tranquility.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Enmity and envy gave way to peace; contentment and rest prevailed
everywhere; ... discord and variance were entirely
appeased.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Creatures of every variety were moved one toward another lovingly;
fear and terror altogether put away, none entertained a hateful
thought; the Angels, foregoing their heavenly joys, sought rather to
alleviate the sinner's sufferings.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The virtuous retain in their mind the good done to them, whereas the
evil they experience drops from their mind, like water from a
lotus-petal.--Jatakamala.

Vice, O king, is a mean thing, virtue is great and grand.--Questions
of King Milinda.

I deem ... unrighteous actions contemptible.--Mahavagga.

Like food besmeared with poison, I abhor such happiness as is tainted
with unrighteousness.--Jatakamala.

As men sow, thus shall they reap.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Actions have their reward, and our deeds have their
result.--Mahavagga.

Our deeds are not lost, they will surely come (back
again).--Kokaliya-sutta.

Reaping the fruit of right or evil doing, and sharing happiness or
misery in consequence.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Your evil thoughts and evil words but hurt
yourself.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Hell was not created by any one.... The fire of the angry mind
produces the fire of hell, and consumes its possessor. When a person
does evil, he lights the fire of hell, and burns with his own
fire.--Mulamuli.

People grieve from selfishness.--Jara-sutta.

Doing good we reap good, just as a man who sows that which is sweet
(enjoys the same).--Fa-kheu-pi-us.

He who does wrong, O king, comes to feel remorse.... But he who does
well feels no remorse, and feeling no remorse, gladness will spring up
within him.--Questions of King Milinda.

Morality brings happiness: ... at night one's rest is peaceful, and on
waking one is still happy.--Udanavarga.

If, then, you would please me, show pity to that poor
wretch.--Nagananda.

Oppressed with others' sufferings.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

A loving heart is the great requirement! ... not to oppress, not to
destroy; ... not to exalt oneself by treading down others; but to
comfort and befriend those in suffering.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He cares for and cherishes his people more than one would a naked and
perishing child.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

The acts and the practice of religion, to wit, sympathy, charity,
truthfulness, purity, gentleness, kindness.--Pillar Inscriptions of
Asoka.

Go ye, O Brethren, and wander forth, for the gain of the many, the
welfare of the many, in compassion for the world, for the good, for
the gain, for the welfare of ... men.... Publish, O, Brethren, the
doctrine glorious.... Preach ye a life of holiness ... perfect and
pure.--Mahavagga.

Go, then, through every country, convert those not converted.... Go,
therefore, each one travelling alone; filled with compassion, go!
rescue and receive.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Have you not heard what Buddha says in the Sutra (where he bids his
followers), not to despise the little child?--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

In this mode of salvation there are no distinctions of rich and poor,
male and female, people and priests: all are equally able to arrive at
the blissful state.--From a Chinese Buddhist Tract.

Even the most unworthy who seeks for salvation is not to be
forbidden.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Look with friendship ... on the evil and on the good.--Introduction to
Jataka Book.

Should those who are not with us, O Brethren, speak in dispraise of
me,[1] or of my doctrine, or of the church, that is no reason why you
should give way to anger.--Brahma-jala-sutta.

[Footnote 1: Buddha.]

Why should there be such sorrowful contention? You honor what we honor,
both alike: then we are brothers as concerns
religion.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

No decrying of other sects, ... no depreciation (of others) without
cause, but on the contrary, rendering of honor to other sects for
whatever cause honor is due. By so doing, both one's sect will be
helped forward, and other sects benefited; by acting otherwise, one's
own sect will be destroyed in injuring others.--Rock Inscriptions of
Asoka.

But if others walk not righteously, we ought by righteous dealing to
appease them: in this way, ... we cause religion everywhere to take
deep hold and abide.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Who is a (true) spiritual teacher?
He who, having grasped the essence of things, ever seeks to be of use
to other beings.

--Prasnottaramalika.

Tell him ... I look for no recompense--not even to be born in
heaven--but seek ... the benefit of men, to bring back those who have
gone astray, to enlighten those living in dismal error, to put away
all sources of sorrow and pain from the world.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

I consider the welfare of all people as something for which I must
work.--Rock Inscriptions of Asoka.

Then the man ... said to himself: "I will not keep all this treasure to
myself; I will share it with others." Upon this he went to king
Brahmadatta, and said: ... "Be it known to you I have discovered a
treasure, and I wish it to be used for the good of the
country."--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

The sorrow of others enters into the hearts of good men as water into
the soil.--Story of Haritika.

With no selfish or partial joy ... they
rejoiced.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

If thou see others lamenting, join in their lamentations: if thou hear
others rejoicing, join in their joy.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

My son, tell me thy sorrow, that it may become more endurable by
participation.--Nagananda.

Every variety of living creature I must ever defend from
harm.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

To think no evil and do none: on the contrary, to benefit all
creatures.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Let the wise man guard his thoughts, for they are ... very artful and
rush wheresoever they list.--Dhammapada.

When thou seest righteousness, quickly follow it: when thou seest
iniquity, instantly flee.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

Like as the lotus is untarnished by the water, so is Nirvana by any
evil dispositions.--Questions of King Milinda.

May I never, even in a dream, be guilty of theft, adultery,
drunkenness, life-slaughter, and untruthfulness.--Attanagalu-vansa.

Spotless even as the moon, pure, serene, and
undisturbed.--Vasettha-sutta.

Practice the most perfect virtue.--Udanavarga.

To attain perfection that he may profit
others.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

The present is an imperfect existence: ... I pray for greater
perfection in the next.--Inscription in Temple of Nakhon Vat.

Fulfil the perfection of long-suffering; be thou patient under ...
reproach.--Introduction to Jataka Book.

My duty is to bear all the insults which the heretics launch against
me.--Buddhaghosa's Parables.

Silently shall I endure abuse, as the elephant in battle endures the
arrow sent from the bow.--Dhammapada.

Let not the member of Buddha's order tremble at blame, neither let him
puff himself up when praised.--Tuvataka-sutta.

The end of the pleasures of sense is as the lightning flash: ... what
profit, then, in doing iniquity?--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Cultivate equanimity.--Nalaka-sutta.

Abhor dissimulation!--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He speaks truth unmixed with falsehood.--Samanna-phala-sutta.

There is guilt (calling for repentance) in prevarication.--Patimokkha.

He that praises him who should be blamed, or blames him who should be
praised, gathers up sin thereby in his mouth.--Kokaliya-sutta.

The member of Buddha's order should abstain from theft, even of a
blade of grass.--Mahavagga.

From bribery, cheating, fraud, and (all other) crooked ways he
abstains.--Tevijja-sutta.

The Scripture moveth us, therefore, rather to cut off the hand than to
take anything which is not ours.--Sha-mi-lu-i-yao-lio.

Let him not, even though irritated, speak harsh
words.--Sariputta-sutta.

From this day forth, ... although much be said against me, I will not
feel spiteful, angry, enraged, or morose, nor manifest anger and
hatred.--Anguttara-Nikaya.

Upright, conscientious and of soft speech, gentle and not
proud.--Metta-sutta.

    Even as the lily lives upon and loves the water,
    So Upatissa and Kolita likewise,
    Joined by closest bond of love,
    If by necessity compelled to live apart,
    Were overcome by grief and aching heart.

--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

(The true friend) forsakes you not in trouble; he will lay down his
life for your sake.--Sigalovada-sutta.

    In grief as well as in joy we are united,
    In sorrow and in happiness alike.
           *       *       *       *
    That which your heart rejoices in as good,
    That I also rejoice in and follow.
    It were better I should die with you,
    Than ... attempt to live where you are not.

--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

    When first I undertook to obtain wisdom,
    Then also I took on me to defend (the weak).
    All living things of whatsoever sort
    Call forth my compassion and pity.

--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Fault is not to be found unnecessarily--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Judge not thy neighbor.--Siamese Buddhist Maxim.

What is it to you ... whether another is guilty or guiltless? Come,
friend, atone for your own offense.--Mahavagga.

Even a king may be full of trouble; but a common man, who is holy, has
rest everlasting.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

This world is afflicted with death and decay; therefore the wise do
not grieve, knowing the terms of the world.--Salla-sutta.

Who that clings to Righteousness should be in fear of
death?--Jatakamala.

Ye, then, my followers, ... give not way ... to sorrow; ... aim to
reach the home where separation cannot come.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Loving and merciful towards all.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Filled with universal benevolence.--Fa-kheu-pi-u.

A friend to all creatures in the world.--Saddharma-pundarika.

Bent on promoting the happiness of all created beings.--Lalita
Vistara.

Conquer thy greediness for sensual pleasures.--Jatukannimanavapuccha.

Therefore should we encourage small desire, that we may have to give
to him who needs.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Justly I seek for riches, and having sought for riches justly, I give
of my ... justly acquired wealth to one, to two, to three, ... to a
hundred.--Magha-sutta.

They sought their daily gain righteously; no covetous, money-loving
spirit prevailed; with pious intent they gave liberally; there was not
a thought of any reward.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

There is in charity a proper time and a proper
mode.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Better would it be to swallow a red-hot iron ball than that a bad,
unrestrained fellow should live on the charity of the land.--Dhammapada.

Our duty to do something, not only for our own benefit, but for the
good of those who shall come after us.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Have respect for the aged as though they were thy father and mother;
love the young as thy children or younger brethren.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

All the people were bound close in family love and
friendship.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Happy ... is the man that honors his father: he also that honors his
mother is happy.--Udanavarga.

How should I be capable of leaving thee in thy calamity?... Whatever
fate may be thine I am pleased with it.--Jatakamala.

He is my husband. I love and revere him with all my heart, and
therefore am determined to share his fate. Kill me first, ... and
afterwards do to him as you list.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

A heart bound by affection does not mind imminent peril. Worse than
death to such a one is the sorrow which the distress of a friend
inflicts.--Jatakamala.

This good man, moved by pity, gives up his life for another, as though
it were but a straw.--Nagananda.

Sprinkle water on the seeds of virtue.--Story of Pratiharyya.

The fool thinks himself alone and commits sin. But I know of no lonely
place at all.... Of a bad action my "Self" is a witness far more
sharp-sighted than any other person.--Jatakamala.

What has been designated "name" and "family" ... is but a
term.--Vasettha-sutta.

Reverence ... is due to righteous conduct.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The wise man ... regards with reverence all who deserve reverence,
without distinction of person.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

For if virtue flags and folly rules, what reverence can there be ...
for a high name or boast of prowess, inherited from former
generations?--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Fools of little understanding have themselves for their greatest
enemies, for they do evil deeds which cannot but bear bitter
fruit.--Dhammapada.

There is not a spot upon earth, neither in the sky, neither in the
sea, neither ... in the mountain-clefts, where an (evil) deed does not
bring trouble (to the doer).--Udanavarga.

Surely if living creatures saw the consequence of all their evil
deeds, ... with hatred would they turn and leave them, fearing the
ruin following.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Exercising love towards the infirm.--Fa-kheu-pi-us.

Ever inspired by pity and love to men.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He lived for the good of mankind.--Jatakamala.

Whatsoever living beings there are, feeble or strong, small or large,
seen or not seen, may all creatures be happy-minded.--Metta-sutta.

Yield not (one moment) to the angry impulse.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Overcome anger by love.--Dhammapada.

A wise man never resents with passion the abuse of the
foolish--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

In agreement with all men, and hurting nobody, ... he, as far as
possible, does good to all.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

   Reverently practicing the four gracious acts--
   Benevolence, charity, humanity, love;
   Doing all for the good of men, and that they in turn may benefit others.

--Phu-yau-king.

   They also,[2] resigning the deathless bliss within their reach,
   Worked the welfare of mankind in various lands.
   What man is there who would be remiss in doing good to mankind?

--Quoted by Max Muller.

[Footnote 2: Buddhist missionaries.]

He identified himself with all beings--Jatakamala.

    Because the dove fears the hawk,
    With fluttering pennons she comes to seek my protection.
    Though she cannot speak with her mouth,
    Yet through fear her eyes are moist.
    Now, therefore, I will extend (to this poor creature)
    My own protection and defense.

--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

How indifferent he was to his own welfare!...

How intolerant of the suffering of others!--Jatakamala. In every
condition, high or low, we find folly and ignorance (and men), carelessly
following the dictates of ... passion.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Neither is it right to judge men's character by outward
appearances.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

The body may wear the ascetic's garb, the heart be immersed in worldly
thoughts: ... the body may wear a worldly guise, the heart mount high
to things celestial.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Full of truth and compassion and mercy and long-suffering.--Jataka.

Uprightness is his delight.--Tevijja-sutta.

Making ... virtue always his first aim.--Fa-kheu-pi-u.

An example for all the earth.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

What he hears he repeats not there, to raise a quarrel against the
people here.--Tevijja-sutta.

He injures none by his conversation.--Samanna-phala-sutta.

Walk in the path of duty, do good to your brethren, and work no evil
towards them.--Avadana Sataka.

Aiming to curb the tongue, ... aiming to benefit the
world.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Intent upon benefiting your fellow-creatures.--Katha Sarit Sagara.

Health is the greatest of gifts, contentment the best of
riches.--Dhammapada.

If thou be born in the poor man's hovel, yet have wisdom, then wilt
thou be like the lotus-flower growing out of the mire.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

He that is rich but is not contented endures the pain of
poverty.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The words of Buddha, even when stern, yet ... as full of pity as the
words of a father to his children.--Questions of King Milinda.

Overcoming all enemies by the force (of his
love).--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

How great his pity and his love toward those who opposed his claims,
neither rejoicing in their defeat, nor yet exulting in his own
success!--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The Buddha has mercy even on the meanest thing.--Cullavagga.

He that ... would wait upon me,[3] let him wait on the
sick.--Mahavagga.

[Footnote 3: Buddha.]

The Buddha, O king, magnifies not the offering of gifts to himself,
but rather to whosoever ... is deserving.--Questions of King Milinda.

If you desire to honor Buddha, follow the example of his patience and
long-suffering.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

    Radiant with heavenly pity, lost in care
    For those he knew not, save as fellow-lives.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

Who that hears of him, but yearns with love?--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

       *       *       *       *       *




Other Titles in Pocket Series

Drama


316 Prometheus Bound. Aeschylos.

 90 The Mikado. Gilbert.

295 Master Builder. Ibsen.

308 She Stoops to Conquer. Oliver Goldsmith.

134 The Misanthrope. Moliere.

 16 Ghosts. Henrik Ibsen.

 80 Pillars of Society. Ibsen.

 46 Salome. Oscar Wilde.

 54 Importance of Being Earnest. O. Wilde.

  8 Lady Windermere's Fan. Oscar Wilde.

131 Redemption. Tolstoi.

 99 Tartuffe.  Moliere

 31 Pelleas and Melisande. Maeterlinck.

226 Prof. Bernhardi. Schnitzler.


Shakespeare's Plays

240 The Tempest.

241 Merry Wives of Windsor.

242 As You Like It.

243 Twelfth Night.

244 Much Ado About Nothing.

245 Measure for Measure.

246 Hamlet.

247 Macbeth.

248 King Henry V.

251 Midsummer Night's Dream.

252 Othello, The Moor of Venice.

253 King Henry VIII.

254 The Taming of the Shrew.

255 King Lear.

256 Venus and Adonis.

257 King Henry IV.  Part I.

258 King Henry IV. Part II.

249 Julius Caesar.

250 Romeo and Juliet.

259 King Henry VI. Part I.

260 King Henry VI. Part II.

261 King Henry VI. Part III.

262 Comedy of Errors.

263 King John.

264 King Richard III.

265 King Richard II.

267 Pericles.

268 Merchant of Venice.




Fiction


143 In the Time of the Terror. Balzac.

280 Happy Prince and Other Tales. Wilde.

182 Daisy Miller. Henry James.

162 The Murders in The Rue Morgue and Other Tales.  Edgar Allan Poe.

345 Clarimonde. Gautier.

292 Mademoiselle Fifi. De Maupassant.

199 The Tallow Ball. De Maupassant.

6 De Maupassant's Stories.

15 Balzac's Stories.

344 Don Juan and Other Stories. Balzac.

318 Christ in Flanders and Other Stories. Balzac.

230 The Fleece of Gold. Theophile Gautier.

178 One of Cleopatra's Nights. Gautier.

314 Short Stories. Daudet.

58 Boccaccio's Stories.

45 Tolstoi's Short Stories.

12 Poe's Tales of Mystery.

290 The Gold Bug. Edgar Allan Poe.

145 Great Ghost Stories.

21 Carmen. Merimee.

23 Great Stories of the Sea.

319 Comtesse de Saint-Gerane. Dumas.

38 Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. Stevenson.

279 Will o' the Mill; Markheim. Stevenson.

311 A Lodging for the Night. Stevenson.

27 Last Days of a Condemned Man. Hugo.

151 Man Who Would Be King. Kipling.

148 Strength of the Strong. London.

41 Christmas Carol. Dickens.

57 Rip Van Winkle. Irving.

100 Red Laugh. Andreyev.

105 Seven That Were Hanged. Andreyev.

102 Sherlock Holmes Tales. Conan Doyle.

161 Country of the Blind. H. G. Wells.

85 Attack on the Mill. Zola.

156 Andersen's Fairy Tales.

158 Alice in Wonderland.

37 Dream of John Ball. William Morris.

40 House and the Brain. Bulwer Lytton.

72 Color of Life. E. Haldeman-Julius.

198 Majesty of Justice. Anatole France.

215 The Miraculous Revenge. Bernard Shaw.

24 The Kiss and Other Stories. Chekhov.

285 Euphorian in Texas. George Moore.

219 The Human Tragedy. Anatole France.

296 The Marquise. George Sand.

239 Twenty-Six Men and a Girl. Gorki.

29 Dreams. Olive Schreiner.

232 The Three Strangers. Thomas Hardy.

277 The Man Without a Country. E. E. Hale.




History, Biography


324 Life of Lincoln. Bowers.

312 Life and Works of Laurence Sterne. Gunn.

328 Addison and His Times. Finger.

323 The Life of Joan of Arc.

339 Thoreau--The Man Who Escaped from the Herd. Finger.

126 History of Rome. A. F. Giles.

128 Julius Caesar: Who He Was.

185 History of Printing.

149 Historic Crimes and Criminals. Finger.

175 Science of History. Froude.

104 Battle of Waterloo. Victor Hugo.

 52 Voltaire. Victor Hugo.

125 War Speeches of Woodrow Wilson.

22 Tolstoy: His Life and Works.

142 Bismarck and the German Empire.

286 When the Puritans Were in Power.

343 Life of Columbus.

66 Crimes of the Borgias. Dumas.

287 Whistler: The Man and His Work.

51 Bruno: His Life and Martyrdom.

147 Cromwell and His Times.

236 State and Heart Affairs of Henry VIII.

50 Paine's Common Sense.

88 Vindication of Paine. Ingersoll.

33 Brann: Smasher of Shams.

163 Sex Life in Greece and Rome.

214 Speeches of Lincoln.

276 Speeches and Letters of Geo. Washington.

144 Was Poe Immoral? Whitman.

223 Essay on Swinburne.

227 Keats, The Man and His Work.

150 Lost Civilizations. Finger.

170 Constantine and the Beginnings of Christianity.

201 Satan and the Saints.

67 Church History. H. M. Tichenor.

169 Voices from the Past.

266 Life of Shakespeare and Analysis of His Plays.

123 Life of Madame Du Barry.

139 Life of Dante.

69 Life of Mary, Queen of Scots. Dumas.

5 Life of Samuel Johnson.  Macaulay.

174 Trial of William Penn.




Humor


291 Jumping Frog and Other Humorous Tales. Mark Twain.

18 Idle Thoughts of an Idle Fellow. Jerome.

100 English as She Is Spoke. Mark Twain.

231 Eight Humorous Sketches. Mark Twain.

205 Artemus Ward. His Book.

187 Whistler's Humor.

216 Wit of Heinrich Heine. George Eliot.

20 Let's Laugh. Nasby.




Literature


278 Friendship and Other Essays. Thoreau.

195 Thoughts on Nature. Thoreau.

194 Lord Chesterfield's Letters.

63 A Defense of Poetry. Shelley.

97 Love Letters of King Henry VIII.

3 Eighteen Essays. Voltaire.

28 Toleration. Voltaire.

89 Love Letters of Men and Women of Genius.

186 How I Wrote "The Raven." Poe.

 87 Love, an Essay. Montaigne.

 48 Bacon's Essays.

 60 Emerson's Essays.

 84 Love Letters of a Portuguese Nun.

 26 On Going to Church. G. B. Shaw.

135 Socialism for Millionaires. G. B. Shaw.

 61 Tolstoi's Essays.

176 Four Essays. Havelock Ellis.

160 Lecture on Shakespeare. Ingersoll.

 75 Choice of Books. Carlyle.

288 Essays on Chesterfield and Rabelais. Sainte-Beuve.

 76 The Prince of Peace. W. J. Bryan.

 86 On Reading. Brandes.

 95 Confessions of An Opium Eater.

213 Lecture on Lincoln. Ingersoll.

177 Subjection of Women. John Stuart Mill.

 17 On Walking. Thoreau.

 70 Charles Lamb's Essays.

235 Essays. Gilbert K. Chesterton.

  7 A Liberal Education. Thomas Huxley.

233 Thoughts on Literature and Art. Goethe.

225 Condescension in Foreigners. Lowell.

221 Women, and Other Essays. Maeterlinck.

 10 Shelley. Francis Thompson.

289 Pepys' Diary.

299 Prose Nature Notes. Walt Whitman.

315 Pen, Pencil and Poison. Oscar Wilde.

313 The Decay of Lying. Oscar Wilde.

 36 Soul of Man Under Socialism. O. Wilde.

293 Francois Villon: Student, Poet and Housebreaker. R. L. Stevenson.




Maxims and Epigrams


179 Gems from Emerson.

 77 What Great Men Have Said About Women.

304 What Great Women Have Said About Men.

310 The Wisdom of Thackeray.

193 Wit and Wisdom of Charles Lamb.

56 Wisdom of Ingersoll.

106 Aphorisms. George Sand.

168 Epigrams. Oscar Wilde.

 59 Epigrams of Wit and Wisdom.

 35 Maxims. Rochefoucauld.

154 Epigrams of Ibsen.

197 Witticisms and Reflections. De Sevigne.

180 Epigrams of George Bernard Shaw.

155 Maxims. Napoleon.

181 Epigrams. Thoreau.

228 Aphorisms. Huxley.

113 Proverbs of England.

114 Proverbs of France.

115 Proverbs of Japan.

116 Proverbs of China.

117 Proverbs of Italy.

118 Proverbs of Russia.

119 Proverbs of Ireland.

120 Proverbs of Spain.

121 Proverbs of Arabia.




Philosophy, Religion


159 A Guide to Plato. Durant.

322 The Buddhist Philosophy of Life.

347 A Guide to Stoicism.

124 Theory of Reincarnation Explained.

157 Plato's Republic.

 62 Schopenhauer's Essays.

 94 Trial and Death of Socrates.

 65 Meditations of Marcus Aurelius.

 64 Rudolf Eucken: His Life and Philosophy.

  4 Age of Reason. Thomas Paine.

 55 Herbert Spencer: His Life and Works.

 44 Aesop's Fables.

165 Discovery of the Future. H. G. Wells.

 98 Dialogues of Plato.

325 Essence of Buddhism.

103 Pocket Theology. Voltaire.

132 Foundations of Religion.

138 Studies in Pessimism. Schopenhauer.

211 Idea of God in Nature. John Stuart Mill.

212 Life and Character. Goethe.

200 Ignorant Philosopher. Voltaire.

101 Thoughts of Pascal.

210 The Stoic Philosophy. Prof. G. Murray.

224 God: Known and Unknown. Butler.

19 Nietzsche: Who He Was and What He Stood For.

204 Sun Worship and Later Beliefs. Tichenor.

207 Olympian Gods. H. M. Tichenor.

184 Primitive Beliefs.

153 Chinese Philosophy of Life.

30 What Life Means to Me. Jack London.




Poetry


152 The Kasidah. Burton.

317 L'Allegro and Other Poems. Milton.

283 Courtship of Miles Standish. Longfellow.

282 Rime of Ancient Mariner. Coleridge.

297 Poems. Robert Southey.

329 Dante's Inferno, Volume I.

330 Dante's Inferno, Volume II.

306 A Shropshire Lad. Housman.

284 Poems of Robert Burns.

1 Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam.

73 Walt Whitman's Poems.

2 Wilde's Ballad of Reading Jail.

32 Poe's Poems.

164 Michael Angelo's Sonnets.

71 Poems of Evolution.

146 Snow-Bound. Pied Piper.

9 Great English Poems.

79 Enoch Arden. Tennyson.

68 Shakespeare's Sonnets.

281 Lays of Ancient Rome. Macaulay.

173 Vision of Sir Launfal. Lowell.

222 The Vampire and Other Poems. Kipling.

237 Prose Poems. Baudelaire.




Science


321 A History of Evolution. Fenton.

327 The Ice Age. Finger.

217 The Puzzle of Personality; a Study in Psycho-Analysis. Fielding.

190 Psycho-Analysis--The Key to Human Behavior. Fielding.

140 Biology and Spiritual Philosophy.

275 The Building of the Earth. C. L. Fenton.

49 Three Lectures on Evolution. Haeckel.

42 Origin of the Human Race.

238 Reflections on Modern Science. Huxley.

202 Survival of the Fittest. H. M. Tichenor.

191 Evolution vs. Religion. Balmforth.

333 Electricity Made Plain.

92 Hypnotism Made Plain.

93 Insects and Men: Instinct and Reason.

189 Eugenics. Havelock Ellis.




Series of Debates


130 Controversy on Christianity. Ingersoll and Gladstone.

43 Marriage and Divorce. Horace Greeley and Robert Owen.

208 Debate on Birth Control. Mrs. Sanger and Winter Russell.

129 Rome or Reason. Ingersoll and Manning.

122 Spiritualism. Conan Doyle and McCabe.

171 Has Life Any Meaning? Frank Harris and Percy Ward.

206 Capitalism vs. Socialism. Seligman and Nearing.

234 McNeal-Sinclair Debate on Socialism.




Miscellaneous


326 Hints on Writing Short Stories. Finger.

192 Book of Synonyms.

25 Rhyming Dictionary.

78 How to Be an Orator.

82 Common Faults in Writing English.

127 What Expectant Mothers Should Know.

81 Care of the Baby.

136 Child Training.

137 Home Nursing.

14 What Every Girl Should Know. Mrs. Sanger.

91 Manhood: Facts of Life Presented to Men.

83 Marriage: Past, Present and Future. Besant.

74 On Threshold of Sex.

98 How to Love.

172 Evolution of Love. Ellen Key.

203 Rights of Women. Havelock Ellis.

209 Aspects of Birth Control. Medical, Moral, Sociological.

93 How to Live 100 Years.

167 Plutarch's Rules of Health.

320 The Prince. Machiavelli.




LIFE AND LETTERS

LIFE AND LETTERS is a monthly magazine, edited by E. Haldeman-Julius.
LIFE AND LETTERS presents creative thought to you in a simple,
compact, inexpensive form. It takes one great personality each
month--such as Plato, Goethe, Shakespeare, Nietzsche, Thoreau,
Darwin--and gives a comprehensive report of the man's life and
achievements. The dominating essay is usually about 15,000 words long.
One year--twelve issues--only 50 cents in U. S.; $1 in Canada and
Foreign. LIFE AND LETTERS, GIRARD, KANSAS.

       *       *       *       *       *

HALDEMAN-JULIUS WEEKLY

HALDEMAN-JULIUS WEEKLY, edited by E. Haldeman-Julius, aims to bring
before its readers concise reports of the world's achievements in
science, literature, art, drama, politics and every other field of
human endeavor. The HALDEMAN-JULIUS WEEKLY brings to its readers the
best works of the world's greatest minds. Fifty-two issues--one
year--only $1 in U. S.; $1.50 in Canada and Foreign. HALDEMAN-JULIUS
WEEKLY, GIRARD, KANSAS.

       *       *       *       *       *

KNOW THYSELF

KNOW THYSELF is a monthly magazine edited by William J. Fielding and
E. Haldeman-Julius. KNOW THYSELF'S policy is to supply information
along the lines of psycho-analysis, sex, science, etc. It is a
valuable source of information. One year--twelve issues--$1.50 in U.
S.; $2 in Canada and Foreign. KNOW THYSELF, Girard, Kansas.

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Essence of Buddhism, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ESSENCE OF BUDDHISM ***

***** This file should be named 18223.txt or 18223.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/2/2/18223/

Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Sankar Viswanathan,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

