The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of Silk, by Sara Ware Bassett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Story of Silk

Author: Sara Ware Bassett

Illustrator: Hattie Longstreet Price

Release Date: April 9, 2008 [EBook #25025]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF SILK ***




Produced by La Monte H.P. Yarroll and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






    [Illustration: IT WAS A RACE TO PICK THE LEAVES]

    The Story of Silk

    BY

    SARA WARE BASSETT

    Author of

    "THE STORY OF WOOL"
    "THE STORY OF LEATHER"
    "THE STORY OF IRON"
    "THE STORY OF GLASS"
    "THE STORY OF SUGAR"
    "THE STORY OF PORCELAIN"

    ILLUSTRATED BY
    HATTIE LONGSTREET PRICE

    THE PENN PUBLISHING
    COMPANY PHILADELPHIA
    1925


    COPYRIGHT
    1918 BY
    THE PENN
    PUBLISHING
    COMPANY




    _To the Boys and Girls of Auburndale,
    Massachusetts, this book is
    affectionately inscribed_




Contents


       I. The Bretton Family                                  9

      II. The Silk House                                     22

     III. Père Benedict                                      34

      IV. A Supper Party                                     52

       V. The Silkworms                                      63

      VI. Busy Days                                          76

     VII. The Silk Harvest                                   90

    VIII. Pierre Makes a Friend                             100

      IX. Henri Makes a Suggestion                          120

       X. The Awakening of the Chrysalis                    133

      XI. Pierre Takes Another Journey                      144

     XII. The Home-Coming                                   156

    XIII. Pierre Takes the Helm                             172

     XIV. Pierre as a Teacher                               182

      XV. The Great Surprise                                206




Illustrations


                                                           PAGE

    It Was a Race to Pick the Leaves               Frontispiece

    "It Is Like a Fairy Story"                               46

    He Led the Way Into a Long Room                         108

    "Go on Tiptoe"                                          140

    A Royal Feast                                           169

    "I Shall Do My Best"                                    190




[Illustration]




THE STORY OF SILK

CHAPTER I

THE BRETTON FAMILY


Madame Antoinette Bretton went for the third time to the door of her
tiny cottage and, shading her eyes, looked anxiously up the side of the
ice-capped mountain that flanked the garden. There was still no one in
sight, and with a shake of her head she returned to the coarse grey
socks she was knitting.

It was late afternoon, and through the stillness she could hear the roar
of the river, the tinkle of herd-bells, and the faint sound of chimes
from the far-away village chapel. How quiet the house seemed without
Marie and Pierre! The boy and girl had climbed to the hillside pasture
to drive the goats down for milking and Hector, the great St. Bernard
dog that had been the children's companion ever since they were born,
had gone with them, for Hector was an expert at rounding up a herd.
Although he was not a young dog he had the zeal of a puppy; with this he
combined the wisdom of a sage, and it was for the latter reason that
Madame Bretton never worried about her children when Hector was with
them. For to Madame Bretton the boy and the girl were still children.
Neither Hector, Marie, nor Pierre had dreamed of being really grown up
until the Great War had come and Monsieur Bretton, together with Uncle
Jacques, had been called to the colors of France.

Throughout the valley were other boys and girls whose fathers, brothers,
and uncles had left their homes behind--boys and girls who were not as
old as Marie or Pierre, but who nevertheless were courageously trying to
do the work of their elders. Marie was now nearly fifteen, and Pierre
was sixteen; but when suddenly called upon to take their father's place,
they felt much older. Yesterday they had been children with little to do
but play; to-day work was ahead of them, much hard work, which seemed to
have aged them in a single night and turned them from boy and girl into
responsible grown up persons.

What a different village Bellerivre was with so many of its men away!

Yet how bravely its peasants had responded to the call, and how
dauntlessly those left behind had risen to meet the new conditions of
living!

"We who remain at home must keep things running in the customary
grooves, so that our soldiers may find the town unchanged when they
return," had been the cry.

And so these noble-hearted mothers and children had toiled
uncomplainingly at garden, vineyard, and loom; had tended flocks of
goats and cattle; and had harvested the hay and grain. For Bellerivre,
walled in between the river Eisen and the snowy capped Pyrenees, was a
fertile valley on which, in spite of the tragedy of national warfare,
the sun seemed ever to shine. It was a mere dot of a place, with a
vine-covered chapel, a low white convent tucked away among the hills,
and a scattering of houses. In the centre of the town stood La Maison de
Sainte Genevieve, the home of Monsieur le Curé, the much loved parish
priest, who although bent and white-haired was the friend, counselor,
and teacher of both young and old. The little schoolhouse where he had
been accustomed to meet the children was, however, now closed; for in
these troublous war days boys and girls had far more important duties to
perform than to learn lessons. There were the great vineyards that
striped the hills--these must not perish for want of care; then there
were the gardens and hay-fields.

But none of these things, vital as they appeared, were of first
importance in the community. It was from quite a different source that
the peasants of Bellerivre derived their livelihood--a source peculiar
if one was unfamiliar with it, but which had been the primary interest
of the valley ever since its people could remember. They raised
silkworms!

Not only did the father of Marie and Pierre earn his living thus, but so
also did most of the other fathers in that green valley. As long ago as
the boy and girl had been old enough to walk they had toddled out into
the sunshine and helped gather mulberry leaves; and they had not been
much older than this before they had learned exactly what kind of leaves
the tiny spinners liked best to eat. The precious grove of white
mulberry trees had been planted years before by M. Bretton, and had been
cherished with greatest care ever since. Each season new trees had been
added and so spaced that their roots might have room to spread. Around
each tree a trench was dug to hold the moisture. Some of the trees had
been raised from seed and transplanted into the mulberry grove when they
were three years old; others had been rooted from slips or cuttings--a
much quicker and less troublesome process. It was always necessary to
have some new trees at hand that the very young silkworms might have
tender leaves to feed upon.

How strange it was that out of the vast variety of vegetation these tiny
creatures would eat nothing but mulberry leaves! Over and over again, M.
Bretton told his children, people had experimented with the leaves of
other plants--with lettuce, spinach, and various of the greens from the
garden. But it was useless. The wee spinners scorned every such
offering. One woman, it is true, had succeeded in raising a few worms on
witch-grass; but they had not prospered, the silk from their cocoons
proving poor. Mulberry leaves they craved and mulberry leaves they must
have. In time the French peasants as well as the silk raisers of other
nations abandoned their experiments and went to learning how to grow
mulberry trees, studying with care not only which mulberry was best for
their silkworms but also which of the species flourished most
successfully in the soil of their particular country.

The more they investigated the more varieties of mulberries came to
light. There was the Tartarica, or Tartar mulberry, found on the Volga;
the Papyfera, or paper mulberry, from Japan; the Chinese mulberry; and
the more common varieties of red, black, and white mulberry. To the soil
of southern France the so-called white mulberry tree seemed best
adapted, and therefore the French peasants began cultivating it
extensively, mingling with it, however, some of the rarer Chinese
cuttings when these could be secured.

Many a lesson did the people learn about the mulberry tree while they
were perfecting its growth! They found the leaves could be reached much
more easily if the top of the tree was clipped so that it would grow low
and bushy; this enabled children to harvest the leaves, and did away
with expensive labor. But because of the luxuriant climate of France and
Italy the trees of those countries could seldom be kept low, and usually
gatherers had to use ladders to reach the leaves--a process by which
many of them were injured and rendered useless. As no silkworm would
touch a bruised leaf much of the crop was wasted. In China, where the
trees seldom grew beyond the size of shrubs, the conditions for
gathering perfect leaves were ideal; especially as the Chinese cut away
much of the under part of the trees, so that the gatherers might go in
beneath them. In addition to these interesting facts people discovered
that if a single twig was broken from the mulberry tree several new
shoots would branch out in its place. This was surely a valuable thing
to know. Moreover, they learned that the leaves of the white mulberry
were the most tender; that those of the red ranked next; and that the
black came last in delicacy. Few French or Italian people used the
black, but in the colder countries, where it flourished better than did
other kinds, it was used almost entirely. Another delightful discovery
of the sericulturists, as silkworm raisers are called, was that when
their mulberry trees were once properly planted they would, with good
care, live to a marvelous old age--some of them even reaching the
dignity of two or three hundred years. But unless snails and other
destructive grubs were kept away the trees would not thrive. The finer
and more carefully grafted they were the greater the damage resulting
from hungry insects. In contrast the wild mulberry with its acid and
bitter sap presented far less temptation and therefore lived longer than
did the cultivated species.

This and many another lesson did the father of Marie and Pierre have to
learn before he could successfully raise mulberry trees--to say nothing
of silkworms. He must know how to prepare the mulberry seeds by crushing
the fruit, covering the pulp with water, and separating the seeds from
the waste part of the berry. He must know, too, how to spread the seeds
upon cloth and lay them in the sun to dry, after which they were put
away in covered jars, secure from air and moisture, and stored in some
dark place until needed for planting.

To Marie and Pierre, brought up amid the environment of many a mulberry
grove, these facts were an old story, and how fortunate it was that this
was so. Now that their father and Uncle Jacques had gone to the war most
of the care of the silkworms would fall to them. There was, to be sure,
Josef the old gardener--he could give advice; but he was too old and
crippled to do much work.

And therefore it was the two children, together with their mother, who
were planning for their first harvest of cocoons, and were eagerly
awaiting the unfurling of the mulberry leaves before beginning to hatch
out their crop of silkworm eggs. How anxiously they had watched the
trees! How eagerly scanned the swelling buds! Ah, it could not be long
now. Was not the river a torrent from the melting of the winter's snows?
Was not the sun warmer, the heaven bluer, the ground fragrant as if
newly awake? Soon the mulberry trees would be sending forth their
leaves. Until they did, however, it would be useless to hatch the eggs
so carefully laid away, for there would be no food to give the ravenous
little spinners should they rouse from their long sleep.

And so Marie, and Pierre, and their mother strove to be patient,
contenting themselves in the meantime with preparing the empty rooms of
the silk-house, where the caterpillars were to be raised. Many a time
they had not only seen this done but had assisted in the process. Every
step of the work was familiar. They knew well that the labor of making
the place immaculate was far from wasted, for unless the rooms were
spotless the fastidious spinners would either sicken and die, or would
refuse to fashion their wonderful webs.

M. Bretton, who had spent a good portion of his slender income in
constructing the up-to-date shelter that housed his caterpillars, often
laughingly declared that their accommodations were far more luxurious
than were those where his own family lived. Nevertheless it was money
well invested, he argued, since already he had got back from the sale of
his cocoons many times over what the plant had cost him. So successful
had he been that his example had been followed by many of his more
prosperous neighbors until now Bellerivre, tiny as it was, could boast
as fine equipment for sericulture as could be found in all France.

Poor M. Bretton! How proud he had been of his handiwork! How modestly
exultant over his good fortune! And now that he had been forced to
abandon it all and go to the Great War it was unthinkable to his wife
and children that they should not take up his work and strive to carry
it on. Nay, the very bread they ate depended upon their doing so.

Hence do you marvel that Marie, Pierre, and Madame Bretton labored early
and late and denied themselves many things they wanted, that instead the
money might be spent to further the industry that M. Bretton had
cherished? And since what we work for becomes the centre of our
interests it logically followed that all three of them found their task
an absorbingly fascinating one. Playtime and study were cast cheerfully
aside, and in place of them the boy and girl received each day the more
vital compensations that come from unselfishness and hard work.

It was Marie who first detected that the buds near the ends of the
mulberry branches were opening.

As she and Pierre drove the flock of goats down the steep mountain trail
which led from the plateau where the pasture lay she glanced across the
valley. Against the blue sky a tracery of delicate green was showing.

"Pierre!" she cried, "see! The mulberry buds are awaking! Look! Do you
not catch that bit of color against the clouds? We will wait no longer.
Let us tell Mother to take the silkworm eggs out of the dark room and
put them where it is light. Soon there will be plenty of new leaves.
Hurrah, Pierre!"

With a rush Marie bounded past her brother and ran down the narrow path
scattering the goats before her in every direction, and sending Hector
racing homeward with yelps of delight.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER II

THE SILK-HOUSE


Marie's prediction proved a true one, for within another fortnight the
mulberry buds were tipped with green, and it was evident they would be
in leaf with the coming of a few more days of warm sunshine.

"Our silk-growing will begin in earnest now," declared Madame Bretton,
"and before it does I think we'd better take one last careful survey of
the silk-house to make sure that everything is all right."

From a peg over the fireplace she took down a key, and going out,
crossed the lawn to a building which stood opposite. The children danced
after her, entering the silent structure with prancing steps. Once
inside, however, they stopped their skipping as if automatically and
instead began creeping softly about on their tiptoes. Then Pierre
glanced up and laughed.

"I declare if we are not as quiet as though the silkworms were here
already," said he.

His mother smiled.

"It is force of habit," she answered. "We always have to be so quiet
when they are here that it is hard to remember there is no need for the
precaution when the building is empty. How odd it is that their hearing
should be so acute! No one who has not had the care of silkworms can
realize the disastrous results of startling them."

"Father once told me he had known of a lot of silkworms that stopped
eating and died because a sudden noise frightened them," observed
Pierre.

"Such a calamity is not at all unusual, Pierre," returned his mother.
"And more than that, if anything alarms them after they have begun to
spin they will frequently snap the thread of their cocoon and refuse to
spin any more; if they do continue the interruption causes a lump, or
rough place, in the filament so that it is imperfect and has to be
broken and tied. In consequence the silk is poorer and brings a lower
price. So you see how really important it is not to jar their sensitive
nerves."

"Who would think that one of those green caterpillars had any nerves!"
ventured Marie. "Is it true, Mother, that a thunder-storm will check
their spinning?"

"Yes. It often does if the thunder is very heavy. Your father once lost
an entire crop of silkworms because of a severe thunder-storm. The
little creatures died of fright. It is wonderful how delicately attuned
they are."

"And their sense of smell is so keen," Marie continued thoughtfully. "I
remember one day Father hurried me out of the silk-house because I had
some perfume on my handkerchief. I was so cross," she added with a
shamefaced little flush, "for I thought the perfume very nice and I
couldn't understand why he did not like it."

"Miss Vanity!" cried Pierre. "I guess afterward you saw he was dead
right. He couldn't take the chance of losing his silkworms, and I don't
blame him, either. It is far too much work to raise them; isn't it,
Mother?"

"I rather think you will say so when you have raised your own crop," was
the quiet answer.

"Do you remember the Italian Father hired to help him once; and how he
afterward sent the man away because he would smoke, and smelled of
tobacco all the time?"

"Yes. That was another example of the same thing," replied Madame
Bretton. "Your father was afraid to risk keeping the man. The
caterpillars might scent the tobacco and object to it."

"I had no idea they were so fussy!" gasped Marie. "I do hope our
silkworms won't get frightened and die, or else have something make them
stop spinning."

"I don't believe they will if we take good care of them," was her
mother's soothing answer. "Still, we never can tell. We must heed
everything Father has told us if we want to make a success of our task.
To begin with there are the mulberry trees--we must not strip them of
leaves too early in the season, for if we do the sap will be lost, and
the strength of the tree weakened; in addition we must be careful not to
waste the leaves by gathering too many at a time, or by getting the
wrong kind. You know the worms will eat only freshly gathered leaves.
Let us not forget that. And the young silkworms must have small and
tender ones. As they grow older they will need more solid food and their
development will keep pace with the advancing vegetation. It is the
saccharine they take from the leaf that makes them grow; if you feed
them tough leaves with little saccharine in them the poor worm has all
the labor of eating a vast quantity of material that simply takes its
strength and leaves it exhausted and unnourished. Of course we have
plenty of leaves to choose from and we shall not need to economize our
supply of food. But where people grow silk in great quantities they
calculate very closely, and plan to get the greatest number of pounds of
silk from the smallest possible number of leaves. That is the way all
professional silk-growers work. Paying their leaf-gatherers is quite an
expense, and they do not wish this item needlessly large. They buy the
leaves by weight, and the leaf purchasers soon become expert in
selecting those lots that are the most nutritious; for every one wants
his silkworms to grow large and strong so that they may spin fine
cocoons and give out a valuable quality of silk."

"Why, Mother, just feeding them is an absolute science in itself then,"
sighed Pierre in dismay. "I thought if we kept them from going hungry it
was all we had to do. We never shall be wise enough to work out such a
problem as you have put to us."

"It is not to be expected that we shall," replied his mother kindly.
"Such scientific treatment of silkworms takes both knowledge and
experience. Many people raise a good crop of cocoons without knowing
much more than we do--sometimes not as much. I was only telling you the
possibilities of the industry if one were to pursue it on a large scale.
If you and Marie and I keep our silkworms alive, clean, and well-fed,
and reap a reasonable harvest of cocoons, we must be satisfied. I shall
consider we have done well. Only let us not waste more leaves than we
must. In time we shall learn to estimate about how many to gather at a
picking. Fortunately here in France the mulberry trees yield more leaves
than they do in most countries, so I am not worried lest we fall short.
In some countries the number of leaves is very limited, and the
gatherers are compelled to be exceedingly careful not to waste them. I
remember hearing your father say that in Persia, where the climate is
very hot, the natives gather small branches of leaves, that they may be
fresher than they would be if picked one at a time."

"Why don't we do that here?" inquired Marie. "I should think it would be
a fine plan."

"It isn't," responded her mother. "In the first place it injures the
trees to take off so many twigs and let so much sap escape; furthermore,
it makes more waste to clear away. We should only be making ourselves
work were we to follow such a method. The best way is to gather the
single leaves just as we always have done. There will be four of us,
for old Josef can help us. It is fortunate he did not go to the war, for
while he helped your father he learned many things about silk-raising
which will be useful to us, I am sure."

"I wish the silkworms did not eat so much," grumbled Marie.

"They must eat if they are to grow, dear," said Madame Bretton. "Every
creature eats more while growing--even children," she added
mischievously. "But a silkworm does all its growing in a very short
space of time, and in proportion to its size grows faster than almost
any other living thing. Remember, its whole life is over in a few short
weeks. It must live very fast while it lives."

"If only ours _do_ live," interpolated Marie dubiously.

"I see no reason to fear they won't," Madame Bretton said once more.
"But we must neglect nothing. It is the trifling carelessnesses that
bring bad results--the tiny things that it seems silly to take the
trouble to do. If we lose our crop of cocoons because of slighting the
little details it will be our own fault, and we shall deserve failure;
if, on the other hand, we do the best we know, we shall have no regrets.
We must take every precaution to keep the silk-house clean and
well-ventilated, for silkworms demand spotless surroundings as well as
plenty of fresh air. Then we must not allow withered leaves or other
refuse to collect on the shelves where the worms are feeding, for any
waste matter ferments and causes disease."

"Aren't silkworms very likely to get sick anyway, Mother?" queried
Pierre.

"They are susceptible to certain diseases," nodded Madame Bretton. "For
example, there are epidemics which sometimes sweep away the hatching of
an entire season; sometimes, too, the eggs are diseased and hatch into
diseased caterpillars, which in turn lay more diseased eggs. This was
the tragedy that befell France in 1847. At that time the French people
could get no healthy eggs anywhere in their own country, and were forced
to send to Italy for them. Afterward the infection spread to Italy. Then
those from the region of the Danube, where growers had been purchasing
them, also became diseased. The plague spread even to China, until in
1865 the only good eggs to be had were those from India. You can imagine
what a terrible experience that was for the peasants. Not only did they
lose all the eggs that they had raised and stored, but as most of them
were poor they could not afford to import perfect eggs from India. Hence
many of them gave up silk-raising entirely and the price both of
silkworms and of silk became enormous. Only the very rich could afford
to buy either."

"How did people ever get out of such a tangle, Mother?" questioned
Marie, much interested.

"Little by little those fortunate persons who secured good eggs sold a
few to those who had none, and the crop soon increased, for one
silkworm-moth will lay as many as two or three hundred eggs. But even at
this rate it took many years to get the industry up to where it was
before. It was a terrible misfortune to the French and Italian peasants,
and you may be pretty sure that as a result of the calamity every one
set about being careful to prevent another such disaster. Now when
silkworms are ill they are quickly isolated, just as people are who have
contagious diseases. And if there is danger of wide-spread infection,
and the growers think best not to take any risks, they will even kill
many of the caterpillars outright. The sacrifice is sometimes great, but
it is a necessary precaution. Furthermore, present day sericulturists
have learned much about growing silkworms, and the importance of keeping
the silk-houses clean and well aired; they have found that they must
preserve an even temperature within the buildings; wash the walls down
with lime to purify the atmosphere; sterilize the trays from which the
worms feed; and hatch the eggs in large, airy places. The most
up-to-date growers who work on a large scale use incubators. Of course,
however, there are still some ignorant peasants who insist on hatching
the caterpillars inside their clothing, where the warmth from their
bodies will bring the eggs quickly to maturity. Fortunately there are
not many who do this. They have learned better."

"I should hope so!" ejaculated both Marie and Pierre in a breath.

There was a moment of silence; then the boy looked up into his mother's
face and said:

"I understand now why Father was so particular."

"Your father is an intelligent man, who believes that 'trifles make
perfection and that perfection is no trifle,'" answered Madame Bretton.
"He has raised some very fine silk and made a good profit by selling it.
But every franc of the money was earned--it never came to him easily."

"We'll try to do as well as he has, won't we, Mother?" Marie said
softly.

"We must not expect to do anything as well as your father would have
done it; he has been a very successful silk-grower. But we will do as
well as we are able," returned Madame Bretton with a sad, far-away
glance.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER III

PÈRE BENEDICT


When Madame Bretton and the children returned from their inspection of
the silk-house they were surprised to find Monsieur le Curé, good Father
Benedict, awaiting them. The priest was sitting contentedly in the
sunshine, his walking-stick in his hand, and the gentle breeze stirring
his white hair. Beside him stood Hector with nose on the Curé's knee and
great brown eyes looking into the kindly face of the old man.

Madame Bretton hurried forward.

"Why, Father!" she exclaimed. "Who would have thought of finding you
here! Have you been waiting long?"

"But a few minutes, my dear," was the answer. "I knew well you could not
have strayed far, for the house was unlocked, and the kettle steaming on
the hob."

"So it was," laughed Madame Bretton. "You must stay and share our
porridge with us, Father. It is just supper time, and you have had a
long walk from the village. You must be hungry. The children and I would
be so glad if you would be our guest."

Marie and Pierre added their pleas.

"Do stay, Father," they cried. "Stay and tell us some stories."

Monsieur le Curé smiled into their eager faces.

"I will gladly stay if you are sure the porridge----"

"There is enough, Father, and to spare," declared Madame Bretton. "But
had I known you were coming you should have had one of the hot tea cakes
that you like so much."

"Ah, a tea cake--how good it is! You are a rare cook, my daughter." He
glanced into Madame Bretton's face with radiant smile. "But is not
hearty welcome better than a pyramid of tea cakes? If you are sure about
the porridge----"

He chuckled playfully.

"There is plenty, Father--plenty," put in Marie. "I saw Mother measure
it. And if there weren't you should have mine," she added as she
joyously seized his baretta and stick and hurried away with them.

"You are a good child, Marie," the old priest called after her. "Now
make haste to put my things away, and then you and Pierre shall come
here and tell me how your silk-raising is getting on. Have you begun to
hatch out your silkworms yet?"

The boy and girl nestled at his side. Had not Father Benedict brought
them up; and was he not friend as well as teacher? In every home in
Bellerivre his coming was hailed with delight, and his departure
followed with regret. He possessed the rare attributes of sympathy and
simplicity sometimes blended in great natures. None of his flock
experienced a happiness too trivial for him to exult in, or a grief too
personal for him to share.

Madame Bretton glanced for a second at the group on the door-step--at
the white-haired man, the bright-faced children, the old dog; then she
softly tiptoed into the house to make ready the evening meal.

"We haven't hatched any of our silkworms yet, Father," answered Marie,
"but everything is prepared, and we shall begin in a day or two; perhaps
to-morrow if there is warm sun."

"That is right," nodded the priest. "It is full time they were under
way. That is one reason I came to see you. You live so far away that I
feared you might not know that all through the valley the silk-raising
is beginning. Already some of the peasants in the village have hatched
their eggs; but I think they were a bit too hurried about it, for the
trees are hardly leaved out enough yet. Sometimes it is as bad to be too
early as too late. I hope you are going to have fine luck, my dears,
fine luck! And indeed I don't see why you shouldn't."

"We hope so too, Father. It means a great deal to us to succeed, you
know," responded Pierre gravely. "You see it is not alone that we need
the money for ourselves. It is for Mother as well; and so that we may
also send things to Father and Uncle Jacques."

The priest patted the boy's head.

"I know, I know," he answered softly. "Well, be of good courage, my
children, and do not be disheartened if you meet with failure at the
start. Try a second time, and a third, and many more. The people who
first raised silkworms had to try and fail many, many times before they
succeeded."

"Who did first raise silkworms, Father?" questioned Marie. "I was
wondering about it the other day. Where did we get the first silkworm
eggs, and who thought of reeling the silk from the cocoons?"

"That is a pretty big question, Marie," laughed Father Benedict. "Nobody
can be exactly sure who originated the industry of sericulture. Certain
it was, however, that before other countries had sugar, or china, or
silk, the Chinese people were producing all of these things. But they
were a selfish nation, and jealous of allowing any one else to share in
their progress. Therefore they shut the rest of the world out of their
discoveries and kept to themselves the secret of how they obtained the
products they manufactured. For China, you must know, was a great walled
country where travelers were not very welcome, and whose people mingled
little with the inhabitants of other lands. How the Chinese learned to
make silk we do not know; but there are in existence old records showing
that as far back as the year 2700 B. C., these ingenious people were
making fabrics spun from the filament taken from the cocoons of the
silkworm. There is an ancient story that the Empress See-ling-shee
hatched and raised silkworms in her garden, afterward winding the silken
thread from the cocoons and weaving a delicate gauzy tissue from the
fibres. Who taught her to do it no one can tell. Some persons think the
Chinese stole the art from India; certain it was that the inhabitants of
Persia, Tyre, and other eastern countries got silk thread from somewhere
at a very early date and used it. In fact it was because the Greeks and
Romans called the land beyond the Ganges 'Seres' that later the name
sericulture became the term applied to silk-raising."

The priest paused and gently stroked Hector's head.

"There are many ancient references to the use of silk," he went on. "We
read how Alexander the Great brought home from Persia wonderful silk
fabrics when he and Aristotle went there to collect curiosities. He even
tells how the silkworms produced this material which, by the way, he
calls bombykia; but nowhere does he tell in what place the industry had
its origin. However, he at least knew more about it than did most
people, for the common opinion was that the tissue was made from wool,
or the fibre of trees, some persons even thinking it came from the bark.
Another notion was that silk was woven from thread spun by the spider;
still others argued that the cocoanut was its source."

"How stupid of them!" ejaculated Marie.

"Ah, it was not really so strange after all, my dear," replied the
priest. "Suppose you were seeing silk for the first time. Where should
you think it came from?"

"I don't know."

"Precisely. And that is just the way the rest of the world felt at that
time," continued Père Benedict. "Nobody knew, and in consequence
everybody made the best guess he could. Until the time of Justinian
silk-making was confined wholly to China, being in fact little known
anywhere in Europe before the reign of Emperor Augustus. What little
silk there was cost so much that no one dreamed of wearing it. At last,
however, some of the women of the royal houses of Rome ventured to use
it for robes of state; and then the very rich men gradually followed
their example and began to use it a little, for it was a cool, light
material to wear in hot weather. Weavers had not learned at that time to
make the rich silks such as we have to-day; nor were the heavy kinds
considered so beautiful as were the thinner varieties. But in time it
became the common opinion that such fragile textiles were no material
for men to wear; the Emperor feared the custom would make them vain and
foppish. Accordingly a law was passed forbidding male citizens to use
silk apparel."

Pierre laughed.

"But the Romans were no longer content with their coarse woolen robes,"
went on Monsieur le Curé. "They had seen silk and they wanted it. They
were a luxury loving people who eagerly caught up every form of elegance
that came in their way. Many of the rich had enjoyed the splendor and
comfort of silken garments and they were not to be deterred from
possessing them. Persian traders who possibly got their silk thread from
China, and who held the monopoly of the woven fabrics, began sending
their goods to Rome, charging for them most outrageous prices. Then came
the Persian invasion, and the program was reversed; for Rome turned on
the Orientals, levying such a high tax on the manufacture of silk that
the industry of the Persians was greatly injured. And all this time that
the Romans were wearing silk and fighting about it they were still
unable to find out where the silk fibre came from."

Père Benedict broke into a hearty laugh.

"Did they ever find out?" inquired Marie whose eyes had scarcely left
the face of the priest.

"Of course they did, silly!" was Pierre's scornful response.

"Gently, son, to your little sister," said Monsieur le Curé.

Pierre flushed.

"They did find out, Marie," continued Père Benedict kindly. "And it was
in a strange way, too."

"Tell us!" exclaimed both the boy and girl simultaneously.

"It chanced that there were two monks who were sent on a mission to
India, and who ventured within the borders of China. While there they
saw the Chinese raising silkworms, and returning to Rome they related
their story to the Emperor Justinian."

"I think it was mean of them!" announced Marie with spirit.

"I'm afraid it was, my child," agreed Father Benedict. "Yet after all
was it quite fair for the Chinese to keep to themselves a thing which it
was for the world's good to know? Was not such a course both narrow and
selfish?"

"Perhaps it was."

"Well, at any rate, the monks were sent back to China with orders to
procure some of the silkworm's eggs. Now this was not an easy task,
because no one was allowed to carry such treasures out of China. Had a
traveler been discovered doing so he would certainly have been killed.
Hence the problem was how to accomplish the feat."

Marie and Pierre edged closer.

"The story goes that the wily monks had some hollow staffs made, and
that inside these they stowed away the precious eggs, departing out of
China in the guise of pilgrims. On their arrival in Rome the eggs were
hatched and the stolen silkworms became the ancestors of all the
silkworms in Europe--perhaps the great-great-great-great-grandparents of
the very ones you are going to raise next week."

The boy and girl laughed merrily.

"The rest of the story is that Emperor Justinian had mulberry trees
planted throughout the Roman Empire and brought to Rome weavers from
Tyre and Berytus. These workmen trained other weavers, and in the
meantime more and more eggs were hatched. All Europe seized upon the
industry. Mulberry trees were planted in Greece and in other countries
where the climate was sufficiently warm to make them grow. From Greece
the trade spread at a later date to Venice, at that time one of the
foremost patrons of the arts. But all the silks made up to this period
were very plain, because it was not until long afterward that
manufacturers learned how to make velvets, satins, and brocades. Then
came a revolution in China, and for the next six hundred years Rome and
Greece had the principal supply of silkworms and the monopoly of the
industry. Was it not fortunate now, Marie, that the Romans had stolen
the secret of making silk?" Père Benedict pinched her cheek playfully.
"Had they not done so the art might, perhaps, have been lost, as were
so many other of the early arts. Numberless other conquests and wars in
various countries followed. I won't stop to tell you about them; but one
of the good results evolving out of the turmoil was that silk-making
spread to Sicily, Italy, and Spain."

[Illustration: "IT IS LIKE A FAIRY STORY"]

"And France--was she left out, Father?" asked Pierre anxiously.

"Have no fears for your native land, my son. France came into her
silk-making heritage about the time of Francis I. England followed her
example more slowly because, you know, our English brothers are a little
more conservative than we are. All in good time, however, England made
silks and very beautiful ones, too, in which her kings and queens were
resplendent on state occasions."

"It is like a fairy story, Father," murmured Marie.

"Then you are not tired?"

"Tired!"

The priest smiled.

"At the beginning of the sixteenth century Bologna had the finest
throwing mills for the twisting and spinning of thread then known. But
China with its peculiarly fertile soil still continued to be the land
best adapted for raising raw silk, although several other countries
surpassed it in the manufacture of fabrics. In Italy silk-making like
glass-making was held to be one of the most honorable of occupations;
and silk-makers intermarried with the nobility, being accorded equality
of rank with the best born families."

Père Benedict paused for breath; then gave an odd little chuckle.

"I could tell you many an amusing tale of the early uses of silk," he
said. "Picture, for example, Henry V celebrating his victory at
Agincourt by putting purple silk sails on his ships! And think of Queen
Elizabeth receiving as a gift a pair of knitted silk stockings which, by
the way, so spoiled her for wearing woolen ones that she disliked ever
to wear them again. Silken hose were a rarity in those days, even for
queens. Now of course as people saw more and more uses to which silk
could be put they came to want it; and the monarchs of all countries,
realizing that silk-making would bring money into their coffers, urged
their subjects to take up sericulture. Henry IV of France did much to
make it popular among the French peasants, offering rewards to those who
would grow mulberry trees. England was found to have too cold a climate
for silk cultivation; so James I, who was king at that time, tried to
have the industry transplanted to the new colony of Virginia. This plan
did not succeed, however, as the American planters found the growing of
potatoes and tobacco far more profitable. In 1732 another attempt was
made in the American states of Georgia and South Carolina and was again
abandoned, because although America could raise both mulberry trees and
silkworms she lacked the supply of cheap coolie labor in which the
Orient abounded. Now the producing of raw silk is left to China, Bengal,
the Coromandel coast, India, France, Italy, and Turkey. Bengal proves an
ideal silk-raising country, for because of the climate there are yearly
three crops of cocoons--one in March, one in July, and one in November.
Some of the other countries have two crops; others only one."

"And France?" put in Pierre.

"Ah, Pierre, there should be no need for me to tell you, a French boy,
of your own land. The growing of our silk, as you know, is done in our
southern provinces; while its manufacture takes place in our great
northern cities. Marseilles is the big market for raw silk, and Lyons
the centre for the manufactured fabric. Meanwhile England has come to
excel in silk manufacture and she now excludes our French made goods
whenever she can that her people may patronize their own makers, who get
their silk from the English colonies. And it is in this great and
wonderful story of silk-making that you and Marie are now to have a
share," concluded Father Benedict. "May you and your good mother be
successful in a work that has brought to our beloved France much of her
prosperity."

There was a moment of silence.

Then Madame Bretton came to the door.

"Supper is ready, Father, and I beg you come in quickly--for while you
have been talking I have made you a tea cake!"

The venerable priest smiled with pleasure, and with a child clinging to
each of his hands he passed into the tiny cottage.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER IV

A SUPPER PARTY


The interior of the Bretton home was extremely simple; and simple, too,
was the supper laid out upon the sand-scoured table. In war time even
the more well-to-do families were living on the plainest of rations,
that all the food which could possibly be spared should be sent to the
men on the fighting lines. There was no sugar, little salt, a scant
quantity of flour, and no meat to be had in the village. Still no one
complained. Was not each serving his country by denying himself those
things which, after all, could easily be done without? Healthy boys and
girls were as well off--nay, better--without cakes and candies, the
grown-ups said; and even the children themselves had come to admit this.

Therefore the little group ate without comment their frugal meal,
thankful that their food was as plenty as it was. The kind old priest,
like his people, was accustomed to scanty fare, and would have been the
first to reprimand his parishioners had any of them offered him anything
else. Simple, however, as was the supper it was well-cooked and
satisfying; and after the chairs had been pushed back, and Marie and her
mother had washed the few dishes, a candle was lighted and the Brettons,
together with their guest, drew their seats into the circle of its
radiance.

"I wish, Father, you would tell us how they make velvet," ventured
Marie, who delighted in the Curé's stories. "That, too, is made from
silk, isn't it?"

"Velvet!" ejaculated the priest. "What a frivolous little damsel you
are! Are you planning already how you will one day dress yourself in the
clothes of a princess, my dear?"

Mischievously he pinched her cheek.

Marie laughed.

"No, indeed, Father. It was only that on Sunday when I saw the hangings
about the high altar it came to me of a sudden to wonder how the velvet
was made."

"You would much better have been thinking of your prayers, naughty one,"
replied Père Benedict, touching her hair lightly with his long, slender
fingers. "However, in order that you may not a second time fill your
mind with such questions I will tell you what I can about velvet
making."

With a sigh of pleasure Marie settled back onto the tiny stool at the
priest's feet.

They all loved to listen to the Father's tales.

"He is better than any story-book!" Pierre often declared.

"The first velvet we know anything about," began the Curé, "was probably
brought from India, where it must have been woven on hand-looms. When
the Greeks and Romans invaded the East, among other spoils they brought
back with them great webs of crimson velvet, with which they immediately
began to decorate their palaces. They had no idea how it was made, and
of course did not give it the name it now bears. Instead they called it
_Villosus_, meaning _shaggy hair_. It is from this quaint old term that
our modern word velvet is derived."

The children smiled.

"It was not strange they should have chosen that name, for you must
remember they had never seen woven material with a fur-like pile, or
nap, such as velvet has; and it must have puzzled them not a little. So
you see it is due to these conquests of the Orient that velvet found its
way into the world. As time went on the supply of velvet increased.
People in other places than India learned to make it. By the fourteenth
century it was extensively used for hangings in the churches of France
and Italy, and was also much seen at court. Robes of blue velvet
marvelously embroidered in gold, which evidently had been worn by church
dignitaries, have been found in an old French church, and are carefully
preserved as curiosities, since all the velvet of that period was either
black or of a crimson color. Now as lace-making was one of the arts of
the time, and as much wonderful hand-made lace was used on vestments and
altar-cloths, you can readily understand how velvet was a rare means of
showing it off, and became a favorite material for church use."

He paused thoughtfully.

"And not only did it rise in favor in the churches, but also kings,
queens, and noblemen purchased all of it they could afford, to adorn
themselves. It was far more expensive than silk, which at that early
date was very costly. In fact it is only since present day manufacture
has mastered the art of making velvet less expensively that its price
has lessened. Although some of the rare patterns and some of the
silkiest qualities are still made on hand-looms, the greater part of it
is now made by machinery. The coronation robes for the King and Queen of
England, for example, are always made on hand-looms."

"Is velvet hard to make, Father?" inquired Pierre.

"Yes. Good velvet weavers are few. You see when our king Louis XIV of
France drove the Huguenots, who were famous silk and velvet weavers,
out of the country, they took with them the trades of silk and velvet
making. Some carried the art to England; some to Germany. The German
towns of Elberfeld and Krefeld now make a large part of the velvet used
by the world--or did before the war. Krefeld alone has one hundred and
twenty velvet factories, besides many others devoted to dyeing the silk
from which the velvet is made. The German Government gives to those who
will follow the industry free instruction in the chemistry of dyes, in
designing, and in other branches furthering the manufacture. As a
consequence the making of velvet has increased there until now many
varieties formerly only obtainable in other countries are now woven in
Germany."

"But some of our own French cities make velvet, too, Father," protested
Marie.

"Ah, surely, dear child! The velvet from Lyons has long been famous.
Lyons and Genoa, many persons say, make the most beautiful velvets there
are to be had. Some are of exquisite design, having great flowers,
scrolls, or garlands brocaded upon them; others are of solid color--a
rare and rich shade--and are made from the purest of silk, which gives
to them a sheen wondrous to see. Such velvets are, of course, very
costly, and only the rich can afford them; but as a product they are a
magnificent achievement. You see velvet-making has now become a
well-perfected art. Time has eliminated ancient methods, and bettered
machinery so that effects never before dreamed of can now be obtained.
There is, for example, the soft panne velvet made by pressing the goods
after it has been woven until it presents a satiny finish, then there is
what is known as mirror velvet, a product woven from more than one shade
of silk, and which in a strong light has a changeable quality."

"It is wonderful, isn't it?" murmured Madame Bretton, who was leaning
forward and listening as intently as were her boy and girl.

"Yes; all that man thinks out with his brain and perfects with his hands
is wonderful," agreed the priest. "It is a test of ingenuity and
patience, and as such should be respected. Moreover, velvet is a useful
product. The best silk varieties are very durable. They ravel little,
and can be steamed almost to their original freshness when they become
worn. Of course cheap velvets and plushes--which are merely velvets with
a longer nap--are another matter. There is much cotton in them, and
consequently they catch the dirt, and are soon defaced. More and more
they are passing out of use as coverings for furniture, or for seats in
cars and halls. The material cannot be cleaned, and as a collector of
dust is most unhygienic. It is well it should give place to something
that is not such a fosterer of germs."

"Won't you tell us how they make the fur on the velvet, Father?" begged
Marie, who was fearing every moment that the good priest would insist on
starting homeward.

The Curé laughed.

"You'll have me here until midnight, little one," said he. "Should I
tell you just how velvet is made it would take me hours; nor, in fact,
am I sure I know every step of the process. I do know, however, that the
soft nap is made by drawing the threads of the silk warp over an extra
wire which leaves millions of tiny loops standing upright, and packed
very close together all over it. In order that the velvet may be smooth,
these loops must be perfectly even and very near together. The closer
they are, the more rich and beautiful will be the velvet. It is when
these loops are cut that we get the silky sheen of the goods. If they
are not cut we have instead the material known as uncut velvet, largely
used for upholstery purposes. Yet another variety called raised velvet
is made by having loops of different lengths so arranged as to form a
pattern. Sometimes, too, we see figures of velvet woven into backgrounds
of satin. I am sure I need not tell you the name for that sort of
goods."

"Brocade!" Marie cried.

"Quite right!" nodded the priest.

"And velveteen, like my trousers, Father--what about that?" questioned
Pierre.

"Velveteen? Velveteen, my boy, was first made in England, and is a less
expensive material, made largely of cotton."

Pierre looked disappointed.

"Nay, nay, son," exclaimed the kindly priest, noticing his face, "do not
scowl at your clothing. Velveteen is a warm and durable kind of cloth,
and is most useful. Only a prince would be raising silkworms arrayed in
a costume of real velvet; and even then, were he to do it, he would be
an extravagant fellow."

"Is velvet made in America?" Madame Bretton asked.

"America makes almost no velvet cloth, but much velvet ribbon, some of
which is very fine. The American mills also turn out a great deal of
cheaper, cotton-backed velvet ribbon. The best quality of their silk
velvet variety is made on looms the exact width of the goods, and has a
selvage and back of satin."

"Can people make----" began Pierre.

But the priest had sprung resolutely to his feet, and was standing with
his fingers pressed to his ears.

"No more! No more!" he cried. "Not another question will I answer. See,
it is already past your bedtime. Besides, I myself must be getting home.
Would you keep me here forever? Run fetch my hat and stick--off with
you!"

They flew to do his bidding.

Then with a good-night kiss on the brow of each child, and a wave of his
hand to their mother, he was gone.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER V

THE SILKWORMS


The next few weeks were such busy and exciting ones for the Bretton
family that not only did Marie and Pierre find no time for play but
Madame Bretton herself could scarcely snatch the necessary moments to
cook the meals. Josef, the old servant who had always helped Monsieur
Bretton about the silk-house, and who had been too feeble to go to the
war, started low fires in the building where the eggs were to be hatched
and kept the great rooms at an even temperature in readiness for their
coming occupants. The eggs when exposed to the air were so small it
seemed incredible that out of them could come the hungry little
caterpillars who would spin that delicate silken filament.

"They are about the size of mustard seed, aren't they, Mother?" remarked
Marie.

"Just about, and they also are not unlike mustard in color," replied her
mother, "although they will not remain so--at least we hope not."

"Why?"

"Because after three or four days they should turn to a light slate
color if they are the sort of eggs we want. Those that remain yellow are
the unfertilized ones and will be of no use to us; we must discard
them."

"And do the eggs always remain slate color until hatched?" questioned
Pierre.

"No, they next turn to a dull, brownish slate tint and then the
caterpillar comes out. The changes may take place more rapidly than this
and the entire process require but a day or two. It all depends on the
temperature and the light. Josef knows by long experience just what to
do to hurry things along."

As Marie and Pierre glanced at the immaculate white shelves that
awaited the newcomers, and realized that for the first time the actual
care of the work they had so many times idly watched was upon their
young shoulders, it seemed like a dream.

"Now there are many pitfalls which we must be careful to avoid,"
announced Josef. "In the first place we must beware of rats, mice,
spiders, ants--even chickens. All of these creatures can work havoc
among the caterpillars. Probably you will not need to worry about them
very much; certainly not the rats, mice or chickens. Hens and chickens
cannot get in here if you are watchful and close the doors. As for the
rats and mice, your father has pretty thoroughly exterminated them.
Spiders and ants will find little encouragement in a clean place like
this, but we must be on the lookout for them, because one never knows
when they will creep into a building. The greatest danger, aside from
some epidemic spreading and destroying your crop, lies in feeding your
silkworms wrongly. Remember, they must have no wet leaves if we want
them to live. You know that already, I guess, or you ought to, for you
certainly have gathered enough food for them. Moist leaves will make
silkworms ill sooner than almost anything else. So never get leaves that
are wet with dew or those that have been rained on. When it looks as if
a storm was coming pick a sufficient number of leaves in advance and
keep them fresh and cool in the cellar."

"The picking does not trouble us so much as the feeding, Josef. We have
never done that. How many times must we feed the worms?"

"At the beginning three times a day; and never forget that the young
worms must have the youngest and most tender leaves. Later they will
need the tougher ones, with more solid food elements in them, but not at
first."

"They are pretty fussy, aren't they, Josef?" laughed Marie. "Lots more
particular about their food than we are. Mother makes us eat what is set
before us, and never allows us to argue as to whether we like it or not;
sometimes it isn't what we'd rather have, either."

"But you manage to live and grow fat on it just the same," grinned the
old servant. "Now your silkworms wouldn't. They'd die, and that would be
the end of them. Of course some varieties are more robust than others;
but they all have to have the same care."

"I didn't know there was more than one kind of silkworm!" exclaimed
Marie in surprise.

"Of course there are," Pierre retorted. "Even I knew that. There are
lots of kinds, and some make much better silk than others."

"Some give more silk, too," Josef put in. "Their cocoons are much
larger. The big white worm such as we raise here is one of the most
profitable. It has four moultings."

"You mean it changes its skin four times?" Marie said.

"Just that. It's a queer life it has, isn't it?" mused the man. "First
there is the tiny egg; then comes the caterpillar with all its moultings
and its ravenous appetite--then follows the spinning of the cocoons; and
the long sleep of the chrysalis, or aurelia, as the slumberer inside the
cocoon is sometimes called. And last of all is the moth that comes out
of the cocoon--when we will let it--and lays hundreds of eggs for future
crops of silkworms. What a short, hard-working life it is!"

"They are funny creatures anyway," observed Pierre thoughtfully. "They
don't seem to want to do any of the things other animals do. Silkworms
never crawl about as most caterpillars would. Shouldn't you think that
after they were hatched they would like to see where they were and would
go crawling all round the room?"

"You would think so," replied Josef. "But they don't. They seem to have
no wish to move. Perhaps they realize that all their strength must be
saved for eating and spinning. Now and then, of course, if they do not
find food near at hand when they are first hatched they will bestir
themselves until they reach it; they move more at this stage than at any
other; and yet they would not move then if they were not hungry. Their
chief aim in life seems to be to eat. They are no travelers, that's
sure. Even when they emerge from the chrysalis into the moth they use
their wings very little, only fluttering a short distance when they are
mating."

"But suppose, Josef, that one wants to get them somewhere else and they
won't go," speculated Marie.

"Oh, it is easy enough to move them. That can be done any time by means
of a good tempting mulberry leaf; they will cling to it tight as a leach
and you can cart them round wherever you wish."

"When do you suppose our silkworms will first change their skins,
Josef?" asked Pierre.

"Moult?"

"Yes. I forgot the word for it."

"That all depends on the temperature of the room and on how fast they
develop. Usually with the degree of heat we keep here the first moulting
takes place within eight days. You see your silkworms are only about a
quarter of an inch long at first, and as they increase in size to about
three inches their skin is not elastic enough to accommodate their rapid
growth. It simply won't hold them. Suppose you or Marie grew twelve
times your natural size in a few short weeks?"

"I'd pity Mother, letting out our clothes!" chuckled Marie.

"They couldn't be let out; the material wouldn't be there," replied
Josef. "And it would be the same way with your skin. It wouldn't
stretch. You'd have to have a new one. That's what the silkworm
does--only it does it several times over. No skin made can cover an
animal that is a quarter of an inch long one week and three-quarters of
an inch long the next, and so on growing in leaps and bounds until it
gets up to three inches and sometimes more. Think of growing at that
rate! And the little gourmands are not eating all the time, either,
because after they are hatched it is three days before they eat much.
They act stupid, and as if they didn't feel well. But later they make up
for their loss of appetite--don't you fret."

Josef smiled grimly.

"By the fourth day they are eating at a furious rate," he went on, "and
they keep right on stuffing themselves for five days. When they are
about eight days old they have expanded until their skin is so tight
that it makes them uncomfortable. It seems to pinch and make them ill.
At any rate they act as if they felt pretty poorly and did not want to
eat much more. Their next move is to cast their skins. This takes about
three or four minutes and is a strenuous business while it lasts; every
bit of the old skin goes--even that from the head, jaws, and feet. The
ordeal leaves them weak and exhausted, but they soon cheer up, and are
eating again furiously as ever. You can't stop them from eating very
long."

"How does the new skin look?" inquired Marie. "Just like the other?"

"Why do you ask such foolish questions, Marie?" grumbled Josef. "Haven't
you seen your father's silkworms hundreds of times?"

"I'm ashamed to say I never noticed them very much, Josef," returned the
girl. "They seemed such horrid little things that I never was interested
in them."

"I don't know much about them either," put in Pierre. "I never expected
to be raising them myself. If I had I should have examined them more
carefully and asked Father lots of questions. It was such a bother
always to be gathering mulberry leaves for them that I came to dislike
the thought of a silkworm," confessed the boy. "Ever so many times I had
to pick leaves when I wanted to go and play. But now, you see, it is
different, because they are our own silkworms and of course we want to
learn all we can about them. I wish, Josef, you'd please tell us about
their new skins."

Josef glanced up good-naturedly.

"If you really want to know of course I'll tell you," he answered. "The
new skin looks just about like the old one, except that it is all loose
and wrinkled. You know how you look when you are wearing a new suit that
your mother has bought for you to grow to, Pierre. Well, that's the way
the silkworm's suit looks on him. It is several sizes too big at first.
But by the end of five days he has filled it all out until he is as
uncomfortable in it as he was in his old one, and is ready for
another."

"And he peels this one off just the same way?"

"Just the same--hat, coat, and gloves. This, as I have said, is not at
all easy, for you must remember that his skin fits very closely all
about his jaws as well as over all his sixteen legs. These are arranged
in pairs so when he shifts his skin it is equal to peeling off eight
pairs of stockings. How would you like that?"

The boy and girl shook their heads.

"These legs are very nicely planned, too," went on Josef. "There are six
in front--three pairs--neatly covered with a thick, shelly coating;
these fit under the first three rings of the silkworm's body and can be
used as hands when he is spinning. Then come the other ten legs, or
holders, which have tiny hooks on them and are the climbing legs."

"But I thought the silkworm scarcely moved," objected Marie.

"Oh, it can move when it wants to. When it gets ready to spin its cocoon
it climbs until it finds a place that suits it. In addition to all
these legs it has wonderfully strong jaws. I suppose the good Lord
bestowed these upon the silkworm because most of its work in life is
done with its jaws--both its eating and spinning. In proportion to its
size the silkworm has stronger jaws than any other of the small
creatures. Underneath these jaws are two very tiny apertures set close
together through which the caterpillar draws and unites into one the two
strands of silk. This is sometimes called the spinaret. The silk
substance, which is really a yellow gum, passes through the two long
glands that run along each side of the silkworm and are fashioned into a
single thread in the spinaret."

"And you say the silkworm goes through the process of changing its skin
four times, Josef?"

"Yes, four times. You can always tell when it is going to moult, because
it raises its head and remains still in that position as if asleep. When
it has grown to the full size of its fourth skin it is ready to spin its
cocoon. This is all very simple when you understand it; and yet strange
and wonderful, too. You'll follow the process more easily when your own
silkworms begin to grow and you can watch them go through all these
different stages."

"I do hope our silkworms will hatch and develop safely," remarked Pierre
anxiously.

"You needn't fear, I guess," was the comforting reply. "I have helped
your father hatch out thousands of eggs, and we seldom have had a bit of
trouble. I shouldn't worry. By to-morrow or the next day I plan we shall
have as fine a crop of silkworms as one could wish to see."

"I hope so--for our sakes and for Father's," said Marie softly.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VI

BUSY DAYS


The Brettons' silkworms hatched as successfully as Josef had foretold
they would, and soon Madame Bretton and her boy and girl had all they
wished to do. Not that the work was taxing at first. For a while it was
a simple matter to gather the fresh young mulberry leaves and keep the
juvenile caterpillars amply supplied with food. Even the litter of stems
and waste material that had to be cleared away with promptness did not
cause much trouble, for most of it fell through the perforations in the
tin shelves and could be readily removed. Now and then, of course, some
unwary baby silkworm fell through too along with this waste matter and
had to be rescued; for the most part, however, the task was simple
enough.

"I do not see that it is hard work to raise silkworms," announced Pierre
at the end of the first few days. "Why, a six-year-old child could feed
them! It is the easiest thing imaginable."

Josef laughed.

"Just you wait, Pierre Bretton!" was his retort. "Some day in the near
future I'll remind you of those words. The first three weeks are not
arduous, I'll agree. The next twelve or fourteen days are harder,
though; there are more things to think of and more food to gather. And
as for the last part of the time--it demands all the care and labor that
you will wish to expend."

But Pierre only shrugged his shoulders sceptically.

In the meantime the silkworms continued to thrive. The weather was warm
and sunny and no irregular conditions broke in upon the work until one
afternoon Josef announced in a warning tone:

"There'll be rain to-morrow. You better gather double your supply of
mulberry leaves; for if you wait until morning the trees will be
dripping wet, so we cannot find food for our caterpillars."

It was a timely forecast, for the old servant's prediction proved a true
one, and thanks to his thoughtfulness, the crop of the youthful
sericulturists escaped famine. After that the silk-raisers kept their
eyes out for the possibility of showers or stormy weather. Never for an
hour did they run out of food to supply the busy little creatures that
were to earn for the Bretton family a livelihood. Tirelessly they fed
the caterpillars; tirelessly cleared away the litter that it might not
ferment and cause malady, or bury the worms beneath its weight and
render them hot and torpid. For it was by keeping them vigorous and
alert, with plenty of fresh food and fresh air that they would develop
the heartiest appetite, grow the fastest, and spin the largest cocoons.
All these points were too important to be overlooked. Whenever the
litter accumulated too fast or failed to drop through the grating of the
shelves the caterpillars were gently removed on a cluster of fresh
mulberry leaves to another spot, and the place made clean and tidy.

Then came a day when the silkworms began to cease eating and instead
paused idly, with heads upraised.

"They are ready for their first moulting!" exclaimed Josef. "They want
to peel off their tight clothing. Watch and see if I am not right."

And sure enough! The great transformation took place even as the old
servant had said it would. Off came the skins--cap, shoes, and all!

The boy and girl were delighted.

After the poor, fatigued, wrinkled caterpillars had wriggled themselves
free from their hampering garments they were sorry looking creatures
indeed! But with a little rest they roused themselves and were soon
eating voraciously, just as if nothing had happened. Day by day their
appetites increased, and to keep pace with them they grew longer and
plumper.

Again they shed their skins, and again were back eating as ravenously as
before.

"The wrinkles surely do not have a chance to stay long in their coats,"
remarked Pierre. "Pretty soon they will want still other larger coats,
too."

Full-sized leaves with a more solid fibre were now demanded by the
maturing silkworms; but Josef cautioned the silk-raisers not to give
their little charges old or tough leaves.

"There is a big difference between full grown vegetation, and old passé
stuff," he explained. "You know how tired your jaws get chewing tough
food. Well, theirs do, too. Remember they chew day in and day
out--nights as well as other times. You've got to conserve their
strength, for they will need every bit of it before they finish their
work. I knew of some silkworms once that died from sheer exhaustion
because they were given food that was too tough for them to masticate.
It is not an uncommon happening."

As the caterpillars continued to eat without cessation the odd little
sound of the cutting of crisp leaves pervaded the silk-house. It was no
such easy task to keep them supplied with food now! Day after day it was
a race to pick the necessary quantity of leaves and remove the
accumulating litter. Every one in the house worked, and even a boy or
two was hired to help in the gathering.

"It is not so easy now, eh?" suggested Josef to Pierre. "Getting tired?"

"A little," admitted the boy. "It keeps one so on the everlasting jump.
Taking away the litter is stupid, tedious work; and then there is the
double supply of leaves to last through the night!"

He sighed.

"You're right. It is a hard job," the old servant agreed kindly. "But
have courage. When you get your first crop of fine cocoons you will say
it was worth it all, and you will forget that you ever were tired."

"I hope so," murmured Pierre wearily. "I get discouraged standing and
hearing them gnaw those leaves. I know they are just making more work
for us."

"You'd have far more cause to be disheartened if you didn't hear them,"
chuckled Josef. "That would be something to mourn over. But you
shouldn't complain at their good healthy appetites."

Cheered by Josef's jests the work went on.

The endless monotony of feeding and clearing up, feeding and clearing up
continued. Sometimes it seemed as if nothing was being accomplished. And
yet when the young silk-growers compared the present size of their
silkworms with that of the early hatched caterpillars the transformation
seemed nothing short of a miracle.

Then came a day when Pierre detected a change in the aspect of his crop.
Gradually the worms had turned to a transparent green color and ceasing
to eat were moving uneasily about. They seemed also to have shrunk to a
smaller size.

In consternation the lad fled to Josef.

"Whatever is the matter with them?" he cried. "Are they ill? Has some
epidemic come at this late day to sweep away all that we have done?"

The boy's face was pale with distress.

"They're all right," answered Josef reassuringly. "They are just ready
to spin, that's all. I did not expect it quite so soon. We must get the
arches up without delay."

Both Pierre and Marie clapped their hands. They knew well what was to
happen next for they had often seen their father arrange the little
arches of brush on which the silkworms were to climb and spin their
cocoons. The placing of these rustic half-hoops was a delicate matter,
since it was necessary to arrange them so that plenty of air might
circulate through the space they enclosed; otherwise the worms would
refuse to spin. Twigs or slender pieces of brush were set along the
shelves in such a way that when bent the shelf above held them in place
and made of them a series of miniature bridges, or arches. For certain
varieties of caterpillars Pierre gathered branches of oak shoots with
dried leaves clinging to them because Josef explained that this type of
silkworm preferred that sort of twig on which to fashion its cocoon;
other brush was stripped of leaves. And throughout the following days
the greatest care had to be taken that nothing should interrupt the
spinning.

The things most to be dreaded were sudden noises; thunder-storms; and
above all a drop in temperature, since chilly surroundings congealed
the fluid silk in the ducts at each side of the silkworm, rendering it
too thick for the creature to spin into fibre.

The noise and the temperature could to an extent be controlled. But the
thunder-storms! Those were another matter.

Anxiously the Bretton family studied every passing cloud.

"If a severe storm should wreck our crop now--at the very end--it would
be cruel!" declared Pierre. "No matter how careful we are we cannot
prevent some great black thunder-head from rolling over the mountains
and down through the valley."

"It is useless to worry, dear," answered his mother. "If such a storm
comes it will be through no fault of ours."

"It would raise havoc in our harvest just the same," cut in Josef. "The
vibrations of thunder sound worse among the metal shelves. They catch
the jar, and seem to hold and echo it. Your father told me about a man
near Tours who had lightning wires along his shelves to protect his
silkworms from electric currents. The wires carried off the worst of the
vibration."

"I wish we could afford to equip our silk-house that way," said Marie.

"Just wait until we get rich. Maybe some day we can," answered Pierre
gaily.

Fortunately for the Brettons' silkworms, however, no electrical storm
came.

The caterpillars climbed serenely into the brush arches above their
heads, selected spots that pleased their fancy, and began constructing
their cocoons. First came the loose, web-like oval within which the
cocoon itself was to be made. This was the work of the first day and its
construction was of what is known as floss. Then followed the yellow,
compact cocoon requiring three or four days for its spinning.
Occasionally two worms would insist upon spinning together, crossing and
recrossing their threads; these double cocoons always had to be sorted
out from the others, however, as the silk could not be wound off them
easily.

The spinning was an interesting sight.

The silkworms poised themselves on the lower extremity of their bodies
and using their front legs to guide the thread, sent it hither and
thither from their mouths in wavy, irregular motion until the little
egg-shaped ball was finished. The two fibres from the right and left
side of the worm were so perfectly united in the spinaret that it was
impossible to detect more than one thread. Patiently the tiny spinners
toiled, and those worms that failed to spin were put into a room by
themselves where the temperature was graded to a higher degree of heat
that the warmer atmosphere might stimulate them to work.

When at last the cocoons were done the Brettons surveyed them with
satisfaction.

The weeks had been busy, fatiguing ones with hastily snatched meals, and
interrupted slumbers.

"One could not keep on like this for a long stretch without more help,"
declared Madame Bretton. "I am glad the caterpillars have their houses
made!"

"They are better houses than you think, too," added Josef. "For each
silkworm has coated the inside of his little home with a gum-like
substance that makes it waterproof. He has no intention of lying down to
sleep in a leaky cottage where the rain may drip through."

"But there is no rain in here," objected Marie.

"Of course not. But the silkworm does not know that. He builds his house
just as he would if it was out-of-doors where the good Lord intended it
should be. Your caterpillar hasn't the wit to realize that conditions
have changed with the years, and that he now lives out his days beneath
a roof that does away with the need of water-proofing. It is because the
cocoons are thus sealed on the inside that the water does not penetrate
them when they are floated. You'll notice that if you ever have a chance
to see the silk reeled off. It protects the chrysalis until it pierces
its way through its silken house and comes out a moth. But of course we
shall not let ours do that."

"Why not?" inquired Marie.

"Why not? Because after you have worked so hard to get your silk you do
not want it broken into short bits and spoiled, do you? If we were to
let the moths mature and make holes in the cocoons it would ruin all our
silk. No. We must let only a few moths come out and lay their eggs that
we may have them to hatch for our next crop of silkworms. We'll select
some of the finest cocoons for the purpose--those that are largest and
most perfect. Some must be male and some must be female moths."

"But how can we tell? Aren't they all shut up inside the cocoons?"
gasped Pierre.

"Oh, it is quite easy," answered Josef. "The female silkworm spins a
house which, like an egg, is a little sharper at one end than at the
other. We'll choose about the same number of each gender. There is a
knack in selecting good cocoons for breeding, and you've got to know
lots of things about them. And after we have chosen them there will be
the rest of the cocoons to sort. That will require care, too. We cannot
do it as experts do, but still we can group them roughly into lots of
various kinds. We can get at it to-morrow. I will give you your first
lesson. I fancy your mother knows more about it than the rest of us for
she has always helped your father do this part of the work."

"It will be fun to learn!" cried Marie. "Won't it, Pierre?"

"I don't believe it will be very hard," sniffed Pierre. "There can't be
much choice in cocoons. Most of them look alike, except that some are
bigger than others."

Josef regarded the boy a moment and then laughed.

"Don't be too cock-sure of that!" he retorted ironically.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VII

THE SILK HARVEST


The Bretton family spent the next week collecting and sorting their
cocoons into baskets, grouping together as well as they were able those
that were to be kept for breeding; those that were soiled or imperfect;
and those that were double. They also separated the cocoons that were of
different colors, for among the lot were not only white ones but many
that were yellow, and even some of a greenish tint. This varied, Josef
explained, with the different species of silkworms. Before the silk was
reeled off the cocoons would, of course, go through another and more
thorough classification under the hands of the experts at the filature,
as the reeling factory was called. But even this first rough grouping
was a help to the buyers.

In the meantime some of the caterpillars that worked more slowly were
still busy with their spinning, and could not be disturbed. Accordingly
much care had to be taken in removing the cocoons that were finished.
Those in the lower tiers of arches were first taken out, and afterward
the ones higher up on the shelves. The sooner the cocoons could be
collected, after their completion, Josef said, the better, for within
ten days they depreciated from seven to eight per cent., and if sold in
bulk, brought a lower price. In consequence the Brettons, who were to
sell their crop to a silk merchant who visited the town each year,
promptly set about gathering their harvest as soon as possible.

Many of the cocoons were really beautiful, being of a perfect oval
outline and of pale golden color.

Marie and Pierre were delighted.

"It is worth all the endless trays of mulberry leaves, isn't it,
Mother?" exclaimed Marie. "Why, even Father could raise no finer or
larger cocoons, I am sure."

"We have done well," her mother agreed. "But remember, we have had great
good luck. No epidemic or disease came to blight the lives of our
caterpillars; nor did annoyances of any sort interrupt their spinning.
We did our part, certainly; but favorable conditions had much to do with
our success."

"I only hope we have kept the right sort of cocoons for breeding," said
Josef. "That is all that is troubling me now. Upon our selection will
depend the quality of our next season's crop. There are so many things
to think of in choosing cocoons for hatching. Not only must they be as
perfect as we can get them, but they must have nicely rounded ends and a
fine, strong thread. I tried to search out those with the ring-like band
round the centre, for I have heard your father say that if we could get
those we would be sure of having vigorous silkworms, since only
caterpillars of the most powerful constitution make their houses in that
way."

"It seems to me we kept out a lot more than we shall need for breeding,
Josef," complained Marie.

"We always have to put aside more than we actually require, Marie,
because many will fail to hatch successfully and will be a loss,"
explained Josef. "Usually growers plan to devote about a sixth of their
crop to this purpose."

"A sixth! Why, that would cut down our sales dreadfully!" ejaculated the
girl.

"Better sell less now and be assured of a plentiful supply of eggs next
year," was the dry answer. "Don't you think so?"

Therefore the cocoons for hatching were gathered into one place and
after the floss that clung to the outside of them had been removed so
that it should not entangle the moth when it came forth from its house,
Madame Bretton took a needle and being extremely careful not to pierce
the chrysalis inside by putting it through the centre of the cocoons she
strung them on strings from three to four feet long and hung them over
some wires stretched across the top of the room.

"There!" she said. "Nothing can reach them now. They will be well up out
of the way of both mice and chickens, and in a month or two should hatch
out all right."

The weather in the meantime had become very hot. The southern sun beat
down on Bellerivre, parching its hillsides, and tanning its people to a
dusky brown. But the peasants complained not of the high temperature,
for was not this torrid sun that burned so fiercely the very factor they
were calculating upon to complete for them the final preparation of
their cocoons for the market? This consisted in killing the chrysalis,
or sleeping worm inside the cocoon, lest it come out and snap the
delicate threads that it had spun. In cooler countries the process was
accomplished by putting baskets of cocoons covered with paper and
wrapped in cloth into ovens about hot enough for the baking of bread.
Here they were left an hour or so until all moisture had exuded from
them, proving that the worm had been dried up. Sometimes a blast of
steam-heat was the method used for the destruction of the chrysalis.
Such methods required greatest care, however, lest in employing a
degree of heat sufficient to exterminate the worm the silk also be
damaged. But in Bellerivre no such artificial means had to be resorted
to. Instead the cocoons were spread out beneath the burning rays of the
sun and left to bake, being wrapped each night in heavy black cloth that
had also absorbed the heat and would retain during the night the high
temperature acquired through the day. For three days this process was
continued, the cocoons being spread in the sun from dawn until dusk, and
then bundled up inside the hot cloth throughout the night.

On the fourth day Josef said:

"Now it is time that we investigated and found out whether the worms are
really dead."

He thereupon took a few cocoons and cutting them open proceeded to
examine the chrysalis inside. It was motionless and dry. Again he looked
at it, this time touching it with the point of a needle. Still it did
not move.

"It is quite dead," he remarked. "And the others must be so too. What
wonder, when they have been so steadily exposed to this broiling sun? I
should be dead if I were to lie in it day after day without protection,
and so would you. We can now safely gather the lot into baskets and put
them away until Monsieur Leclerq, the buyer, comes for them at the end
of the week."

So once again the cocoons were collected to await their purchaser, and
the silk-raisers sat down with sighs of content to anticipate the
payment of the money they had so faithfully earned, and speculate as to
what they should do with it.

"I don't believe you are any more glad to rest than your silkworms are!"
reflected Josef. "When you consider that each one of them spins between
three and four hundred yards of thread you can't blame it for wanting to
sleep when its work is done."

"Do they spin as much as that?" gasped Marie.

"Indeed they do--some of them more. Certain of the finest varieties will
even turn out as many as six hundred and twenty-five yards. But that is
a high figure. They usually average less."

"It is all wonderful, isn't it?" replied Madame Bretton. "And to think
these tiny creatures are responsible for the silk the whole world uses!"

"I know it," agreed Josef. "Of course there are other spinners in the
universe, however. The spider, for example, is a most industrious
spinner, and I have read that in the past scientists tried to see if
some of the larger spiders could not be utilized for silk-making. The
velvety pouch, or bag, was removed and by some skilful process the
greyish thread inside it was carded off. But the experiment was
unsuccessful, for the silk thus made was far less firm and strong than
that which came from the silkworm. After this failure another set of men
tried to make silk by using the filament of the pinna."

"What is a pinna, Josef?" questioned Marie.

"The pinna is a variety of shell-fish not unlike the mussel; it fastens
itself to the rocks and from between its shells gives out threads
something like those of the spider or silkworm. By means of them it
spins a tough fibre by which it joins itself to any object to which it
wishes to cling."

"And did they succeed in making pinna silk, Josef?" demanded Marie
eagerly.

"They certainly did!" nodded Josef. "Along the Mediterranean were
several places where they manufactured pinna thread. They even spun some
fine, silky fabrics from it. But they never could get enough of the
filament to make the industry practical, although in 1754 they did send
to Pope Benedict XIV some stockings made from pinna silk. They were spun
from very fine thread, and were so closely woven and so hot that I doubt
if he cared to wear them unless in cool weather. Since then the weaving
of pinna silk has been abandoned, although now and then one sees bits of
it in some old fabric, or on exhibition somewhere. It is chiefly
regarded as a curiosity."

"What a lot you know, Josef!" murmured Marie, astonished.

Josef laughed.

"I just happened to see that in a book your father gave me," he said.
"It interested me because it told of something I wanted to learn about.
I don't care for reading as a rule. Most books are about things I never
heard of and are no use to me."

"But don't you like to learn about new things?" inquired Marie.

"Why, no, I don't think I do. What good is it?" interrogated the old
servant. "I'm not ever going out of this valley. Why, I'm 'most seventy
years old already! It is well enough for you to learn things--you're
young. As for me, the learning I have has stood by me up to now, and I
guess it will do me the rest of my days."

With a smile on his simple face the venerable man turned away.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VIII

PIERRE MAKES A FRIEND


The buyer who came to Bellerivre from the Gaspard silk mills was a
lively little Frenchman whom Pierre had often seen before.

"So it is you, my young friend, who this year raises the cocoons!" cried
the merchant cordially. "Who would have thought it possible? But
yesterday you were a baby in your father's arms. And now----" the little
man shrugged his shoulders. "Eh bien, le bon chien chasse de race! N'est
pas, Madame?"

Madame Bretton smiled.

"The lad is but doing his best to fill his father's place," she answered
quietly.

"That is as it should be with all good French boys, too," the
merchant assented. "And have you ever visited our silk mills at
Pont-de-Saint-Michel? No? Ah, but you should do so. It is only an hour's
journey, and if you are to raise silk you must learn all you can about
it. If I should give you a letter to our foreman would not Madame, your
mother, be willing you should go?"

Pierre glanced up eagerly.

His eyes sparkled.

"Would you, Mother? It would not cost very much, would it?" He turned
apologetically to the silk buyer. "You see," he explained, "in these war
days we must be very saving, for every franc that we can spare goes to
my father and my uncle, who are in the army."

"I know," sighed the agent. "Wherever I go it is the same. All the men
are at the front. But the cost of the trip I suggested is very little,
and I myself should be glad to----"

"No, Monsieur Leclerq," interrupted Madame Bretton. "I know what you
would say, and I thank you; but we are well able to pay Pierre's
expenses to Saint Michel, since you are so kind as to invite him. I am
sure the excursion would more than repay us. It would not be like taking
the money for a mere pleasure tour. Pierre shall go. It will be another
step toward making a silk merchant of him."

"I wish I could go, too," whispered Marie.

"You are not to be a silk merchant, chérie," answered her mother gently.
"We women are the stay-at-homes, who do all we can to help our men
forward in their careers; that is our work."

And so the next day Pierre, very happy and important, and with a large
box of luncheon under his arm, set out upon the train for the
Pont-de-Saint-Michel silk mills. To be going on such a long journey all
alone was a novel undertaking for the lad, who seldom left his own green
valley. It was almost as wonderful as if he were starting for
Marseilles, or indeed Paris itself. The place where he was going did
not, however, possess the glamour of either of these great cities. On
the contrary it was merely a sort of depot or centre to which all the
cocoons bought up in the vicinity were sent to have the silk reeled
from them; there were also at this plant some extensive throwing mills,
but no weaving was done there. Instead the thrown silk was sold to the
great weaving factories at Lyons, Tours, or other silk-making cities of
France; and the raw product was sent to Marseilles, from which market it
was either distributed to French mills or shipped to England or the
United States for manufacture.

The day was a beautiful one. Massive white clouds hung low over the
distant mountains; but the valley was flooded with golden sunshine that
illumined it like some vast search-light. The vineyards never looked
greener, the hillsides more velvety and cool, or the river more
sparkling. Now the train skirted the banks of the stream, now shot past
meadows of fertile farming land; or of a sudden it crossed a noisy
mountain torrent and crept up the hillside until the vegetation became
low and stunted, and the rocky peaks of the Pyrenees seemed but an arm's
length away. Then slowly down over a trestle of airily poised
bridge-work it descended to the valley again. Was ever a journey such a
marvel? To the French boy who had seen little of the outside world it
was an Arabian Night's dream.

All too soon Saint Michel was reached, and Pierre set out for the silk
mills, where he presented the card that Monsieur Leclerq had given him.
Then for a few minutes he waited in a small office where the jar of
machinery and the whirr of wheels caused a monotonous and unceasing
vibration.

Presently a giant foreman with sleeves rolled to the elbow came hurrying
out.

He regarded Pierre with surprise.

"They told me that one of our silk-growers wanted to see me," faltered
he uncertainly. "There has doubtless been some mistake. You are but a
boy."

"I am nevertheless a silk-grower," smiled Pierre modestly. "It is
because the men of our household are in the trenches that I----"

Impulsively the foreman thrust out his hand.

"I too have relatives in the battle line," he said. "My brother and
cousins are there, and I should be with them now were it not for an ugly
wound I got at the Marne. They will not take me back to fight, even
though I have begged to go. And so here I am--restless and half angry
that I must remain boxed up at Saint Michel and make silk instead of
being where the firing is going on. Yet some must stay behind and carry
on the country's industries. Perhaps I can still do my bit here. I have
tried to be philosophical about it and work as hard as I can, for I feel
that those who cannot help in one way can, maybe, help in another."

He glanced at the card Pierre had brought.

"Bretton is your name?"

"Pierre Bretton."

"Monsieur Leclerq says your shipment of cocoons was a good contribution
to the prosperity of France."

Pierre flushed.

"I am glad if it seemed so. We must support ourselves--my mother,
sister, and I--and not be a burden to the country while my father is
away."

"That's the right spirit," answered the foreman heartily. "And so you
want to see your silk reeled off--yours, or somebody's else? Well, you
shall. I am busy myself and so cannot go with you; but Henri, one of our
boys, shall take you with him and tell you all you wish to know. Do not
fear to ask questions if you do not understand, for Henri is well able
to answer them. He knows everything that anybody can about silk
reeling."

As he beckoned to a tall, slender boy who sat at a desk opposite the
foreman smiled kindly down at Pierre.

"Henri," he continued when the employee approached, "I want you to show
this young silk-raising friend of ours, Monsieur Bretton, how we sort
cocoons and reel them off. Tell him everything you can, for he is a
grower and has the right to know."

"Mais, oui, avec beaucoup de plaisir," answered the boy. "I will do my
best." He bowed to the foreman, who, after shaking Pierre by the hand,
turned away. "Now Monsieur Bretton----"

"My name is Pierre. No one ever called me Monsieur Bretton before, and I
do not like it," protested Pierre smiling. "I am but a boy like
yourself. Please call me by my first name--if you do not mind."

Henri beamed on him.

"I should like it much better," he replied cordially. "And I am Henri
St. Amant. Now it is all understood, is it not? Shall we begin then our
journey through the filature? We will go into the sorting rooms first,
where the cocoons that are sent to us are classified. Most of them have
already been cured, or baked, for the majority of our customers do that
for us. When they do not we have to expose the cocoons in our own
ovens."

"Don't most of your cocoons come to you sorted?" questioned Pierre.

"Most of them are roughly classified," nodded Henri. "But the grading
must be much more finely done. Only experts can sort cocoons
thoroughly."

[Illustration: HE LED THE WAY INTO A LONG ROOM]

As he spoke he led the way into a long room, where on every hand girls
were moving in and out among heaps of cocoons that were either piled
high on tables or massed upon squares of canvas on the floor. The room
and everything in it was spotless.

"We try to keep the cocoons from getting soiled, you see," explained
Henri.

"Is the sorting done by girls?" questioned Pierre, astonished.

"Since the war, yes. We have had to train them to take the places of
those who have gone to be soldiers. It is not, of course, heavy work,
but it requires skill and judgment since the many varieties of cocoons
need different treatment. Here, for example, are dupions, or double
cocoons, which as you doubtless already know have more floss on the
outside than do others, and must be well cleaned before any attempt at
reeling can be made. Often they cannot be run off at all because the two
caterpillars that worked together to make the single cocoon have
intertwined the threads until they break all to bits when we try to
separate them. Here is another species of cocoon." Henri pointed to a
pile on the next table. "These are of beautiful texture, smooth and
satiny. But they must be treated with tepid, not hot, water, as are a
good proportion of the others, and the accumulation of gum mixed with
the filament must be soaked out with soap-suds. This will give you an
idea how many things there are to think of in reeling. Some cocoons give
off their silk too easily, and unless put into cool water will snarl;
others fail to give off the thread at all and instead must be treated
with hot water, which aids in loosening it. Another difficulty we
sometimes encounter is that the reelers cannot catch the end of the
thread to begin their work; this usually indicates that the water into
which the cocoons have been put is too cool. On the other hand if the
silk ruffs up and comes off in snarls upon the brush, the matted masses
indicate that the water is too hot. All this the reelers must learn by
experience, and they must learn it, too, without wasting our silk. Two
general laws underlie this feature of silk-reeling: hot water makes the
silk run faster, and cold water retards its progress. Your problem is to
see which treatment your cocoons require."

"Of course those who sort the cocoons can tell nothing of that,"
ventured Pierre.

"Oh, no. The sorters simply put into one place those cocoons that are of
the same kind. The way the cocoons behave in the water is the business
of the reeler. We have tanks or basins of a graduated temperature, and
the operators soon learn into which one to put a cocoon of a certain
type."

"I did not dream one had to know so much just to reel off the silk,"
murmured Pierre. "I had always supposed it would be an easy matter; but
now I see it isn't."

Henri laughed.

"But I have not told you half our troubles yet," he answered
mischievously. "Thus far I have spoken only of the cocoons. In addition
there is the water to consider. That must be the right sort, too. It
must be as pure as we can get it, both chemically and in color. And even
then the high temperature necessary to bring the silk off the cocoons
will cause any sandy sediment there may be in it to rise to the surface
and cut the filament as we reel it off. We have to be prepared for that
emergency as well as the others. And now to return to the sorting of
the cocoons. Do you see that pile over there? Those are what we call
perfect ones. The thread from them will go into the finest quality silks
and satins, as the filament has neither spots nor flaws."

"But those cocoons are very small," objected Pierre.

"Yes. The best cocoons are not always the largest, by any means. It is
quality, not size, that counts." Henri passed on. "Here now," he
continued as he paused before another lot, "are some more pointed at one
end than at the other. We know from bitter experience that they will
reel badly, because the silk which runs smoothly at the beginning will
prove to be weak in some places and break. We toss them aside and reel
them separately. These _cocalons_, as we call this other kind, are also
thrown out because they are hard to wind."

"They are much larger," observed Pierre.

"You are right. Nevertheless they have no more silk on them. The reason
they look bigger is because the worm spun them less compactly; unless
they are put into cold water they will tangle and mat when reeled."

"And that next lot?"

"_Soufflons_? They are the most imperfect cocoon made. The silk is so
loosely spun that it cannot be wound at all, and is good only for
floss."

Pierre shook his head despairingly.

"I thought I knew quite a lot about cocoons," he said. "But by the time
I go home I shall feel I don't know anything. Why, I never could learn
to sort all those kinds if I kept trying for years."

"Only those who have handled thousands of cocoons can," returned his
guide consolingly. "I couldn't begin to do it. Here is a pile now! They
have a hole in the end and cannot be reeled because every time the
thread comes to the perforation it is broken. Probably the moth was
allowed to escape and injured the filament. They must be used for floss,
too, for they are good for nothing else."

The boys wandered on down the room.

"In this pile you will see what we call _good choquettes_," resumed
Henri. "I must tell you about them, for the species is peculiar. The
worm inside them died before finishing its work and stuck onto the
inside of the cocoon." He took one from the heap and shook it. "It does
not rattle, you see. Nevertheless the filament on it is of excellent
quality--not very strong, perhaps, but of fine texture. In contrast to
these good choquettes is this tableful of _bad choquettes_. Like the
others the silkworm died during his spinning, but this time he rotted
away inside, leaving the cocoon black and mottled."

"Healthy worms make the best cocoons, of course," Pierre rejoined.

"Not at all," contradicted Henri. "Here is what is known as a calcined
cocoon made by a worm which had a peculiar disease that turned it to
powder. You would not think that such a creature could spin the best
quality of silk there is, would you? Yet it is so. Listen to the queer
rattle the cocoon has."

Holding it to Pierre's ear he shook it gently.

"These cocoons not only have excellent silk on them, but they have more
of it than if they had been spun by a healthy worm. As a result they
command the highest price and buyers are eager to find them."

"I guess I don't know anything about silkworms or cocoons either,"
announced Pierre in dismay.

Both boys laughed.

"It is amazing how much there is to know about almost anything when you
once start to learn about it from top to bottom," declared Henri. "I
came into this filature when quite young, and it has taken me years to
find out even the little I know now."

"I think you know a lot," Pierre returned admiringly. "I'd be happy if I
knew even half as much."

"Oh, no you wouldn't," was the prompt retort. "You'd want to know a
great deal more, just as I do--that is, if you were any good. There are
a thousand things I want to find out. The silk business, you see, is to
be my trade. I have an uncle in the weaving mills at Lyons, and some
day when I know more he is to find a place for me there. So I am
learning all I can about the classifying and reeling of cocoons; and I
have also raised a few silkworms so as to be familiar with the very
beginnings of the industry. Soon I am to go into the filature to help
with the reeling; and after that they have promised to send me on into
the throwing mills, where the filament is twisted into thread
preparatory to weaving. Then I shall be ready to go to Lyons and see how
silks, satins, and velvets are made. Lyons, you know, is a famous
silk-making city. It was there that Philippe de la Salle, the great silk
designer, lived. Because he did such beautiful work he was decorated by
Louis XVI with the Order of Saint Michel and was given a pension of six
mille livres. Think of that! Alas, such things do not happen now. That
was long ago--between 1723 and 1803. His good fortune did not, however,
last long, for the Revolution came, and the court which gave him his
money went out of power. Still the people of Lyons were proud of him and
despite the fact that he had been a court favorite they provided for
him lodgings in the Palais Saint Pierre, where he lived for the rest of
his life."

"I am afraid I do not know much about what he did," said Pierre with
engaging frankness.

"Why, it was Philippe de la Salle who designed the silk hangings for the
chamber of Marie Antoinette, and who originated the Empire motif of the
wreath of laurel; he also designed silks gorgeous with garlands
intertwined with ribbon; or decorated with baskets of fruit and flowers;
and sometimes he made use of great birds. He has done some of the finest
silk designs ever woven. My uncle told me, however, that years and years
before that wonderful silks were made; and that fragments showing
beautiful designs are in the museums of Berlin and Nuremberg, as well as
in our own Cluny Museum, and the great museums of London. He said there
were also marvelous church vestments of even earlier date and also some
very ancient Byzantine silks splendid with griffins, eagles, and lions.
Some day, perhaps, I shall go to see them, and maybe I myself may learn
to weave such fabrics. Who knows? And what are you going to do,
Pierre?"

"I suppose I shall just go on raising silkworms," was the quiet reply.
"It is hard work, but I see nothing else ahead for me. However, when my
father and uncle return from the war there will be time enough for me to
think what I will do."

"Ah, but you have a plan already; I can see that!" Henri cried.

Pierre nodded gravely.

"Yes, I have a plan--or perhaps I better call it a dream. I should like
to go to America. One can earn more money there. My mother's brother is
at Paterson, New Jersey, which is in America, and I have some young
cousins there also."

"Yes, yes, I know," exclaimed Henri eagerly. "There are great silk mills
at Paterson where they make fine silks and ribbons--some of them as
beautiful as any we make in France. Maybe some day you will go there."

"I'm afraid not," returned Pierre. "Even should the war end and my
father and uncle come home again I have no money to go to America."

"Don't give up so easily," Henri said, placing a hand on the younger
boy's shoulder. "We never can tell what will happen. My mother says that
if we do the best we can every day sometimes the thing we wish most will
come to us; if not, Le Bon Dieu will send something else which may be
even better."

"I am trying to do my best," Pierre answered bravely. "And anyway so
long as my father and uncle are safe nothing else really matters."

The boys exchanged a smile and passed on into the filature, as the
factory where the reeling was done was called.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER IX

HENRI MAKES A SUGGESTION


"It is now dry weather, and as this is the best time to reel silk we are
working very hard," explained Henri as they went along. "Every machine
we have is running overtime. But before we inspect the reels themselves
suppose we see how the cocoons are soaked and made ready. The important
thing is to get the gum which the silkworm has blended with the silk out
of it, and for this purpose we use soft water, having found that it
loosens the filament better than anything else. That is what they are
doing here. They begin by raising the water to the boiling point, and
afterward reduce its temperature by means of cold water if they find it
necessary. Care must be taken to submerge each cocoon evenly so that its
entire surface will be covered; otherwise one end will be softened and
the other end remain hard, in which case it cannot be reeled off."

"But why do the girls stir the cocoons with those whisks of peeled
birch?" inquired Pierre curiously. "What are they trying to do?"

"The stirring frees the ends of the filaments, and the brush of twigs
serves to collect them," answered Henri. "When the ends have been caught
in this way they are passed on to the reeler; but if after trying this
method the girls find the ends do not free themselves they put such
cocoons into a different temperature of water, or else toss them out
entirely and leave them to the employees who handle the lots that
require special treatment. They cannot stop here to fuss with cocoons
that fail to wind off readily; not only would such troublesome ones
retard the work, but they would be likely to snarl the others.
Frequently we find cocoons with uneven places in the thread, spots where
the silkworm has been interrupted in its spinning and stopped,
afterward going on with its work and making a lump or knob where the
filament has been joined. Such cocoons wind badly, as you can well
imagine, and they, too, cannot be reeled with the general lot."

"I notice those boys are taking the empty cocoons out of the tanks after
the silk has been reeled from them. Is it necessary?"

"Yes. We never allow the discarded cocoons, or shells as we call them,
to stand in the water with those that are soaking, because they not only
spoil the sheen of the silk on the unreeled cocoons but discolor it,"
Henri replied. "Now let us watch the reeling. Shall we?"

The boys turned toward the whirling machinery.

"I had no idea they reeled so fast," declared Pierre, speaking loudly so
his companion could hear.

Fascinated he stood watching the flying threads pass over the glass
rods.

"The speed of the reels can be regulated, of course," answered Henri.
"It is not often, though, that the filament snaps because the reel is
moving too fast. When the thread does break it is more frequently
because the regular motion of the machinery wears it until it parts.
This cannot always be avoided. All filatures count on some loss by
winding. But the percentage in a modernly equipped filature is very
small. We use the glass rods to prevent the thread from being caught or
roughened. The process of winding cocoons has been so carefully studied
that now our French reelers can turn off silk of fifteen or twenty
fibres and lose only one or two per cent. of it by waste. In Turkey the
loss runs as high as six or eight per cent.; in Syria it is fifteen or
twenty per cent.; and in other countries where the people have less
mechanical skill the rate of loss is much higher. Successful silk
reeling is a matter of good machinery, practice, and deftness. An
experienced reeler knows his business too well to waste material."

"All this is amazing to me," said Pierre. "I thought the men just took
the end of the thread and wound it off without any trouble."

Henri shook his head.

"No, indeed. I wish it were as easy as that. A reeler needs judgment,
judgment, judgment at every turn. Not only must the floss be removed
from the outside of the cocoon before it is reeled, but also the first
part of the filament, which usually is weak and too fine for use, must
be wound off until the firm, strong thread is reached. You see, the
caterpillar has to work a little while before it gets under way and does
its best spinning. All that poor filament on which it experiments or
gets started must be broken off and saved for embroidery floss, since it
is fit neither to be woven into broad goods or twisted into sewing silk.
The reeler begins to wind where the end of the filament becomes strong.
He then must combine enough fibres of the same size and strength to make
a thread uniform in size. And this is not so easy as it sounds, since
there is great diversity in the coarseness and fineness of the filament
on the cocoons. He cannot always put the same number of filaments
together. In addition to this fact he is often required to reel silk of
various sizes. The coarseness or fineness demanded all depends on the
purpose for which the silk is to be used. But always each kind must be
of uniform size throughout."

"And how does he join the fresh cocoons to the others? By tying?"

"No. He runs them in so skilfully that the joining cannot be detected.
Every moment he must be on the watch to add new filaments when he sees
any of his cocoons giving out. As one cocoon takes the place of another
its filament blends unnoticed in the thread. You can see that it would
never do to join a lot of new ones all in the same spot."

"I suppose the cocoons run in uneven lengths, anyway, don't they?"
ventured Pierre. "Scarcely any of them would contain the same number of
yards of filament even were they all to be started together."

"Precisely. So the reeler keeps adding fresh fibres, being careful
always that his thread is running uniform all the time. If he uses
fibres of fine quality there must be more of them; if coarser fibres
not so many. He can't turn out thread that is thick in one place and
thin in another."

"That is what you or I would do," laughed Pierre. "Or at least I should.
I never could reel so fast, either."

"It winds better fast," replied Henri. "It has not so much time to
loosen or get caught. It just has to keep moving right along. If we can
get cocoons soon enough so they can be wound off before the moth has
time to come out, instead of having them cured first, they reel far more
easily. The curing affects the silk. Of course in most cases it is
unavoidable, for it would require very quick work for our agents to buy
up the products of outlying silk-raisers and get them to us before the
chrysalis matured. We should be taking a big chance of having our silk
ruined, since one never can predict exactly how long it will be before
the moth will come out. Varying conditions bring different results. It
is a pity, however, that they have to be cured. Still, the curing has
one advantage--it decreases the weight of the cocoons about twenty-five
per cent."

"I didn't realize that curing caused shrinkage."

"Oh my, yes. And perhaps you did not know what a difference there is in
the weight of individual cocoons. This depends not alone on the species
of silkworm raised, but also on the care that has been given it. A
carefully fed caterpillar will grow larger and make a bigger cocoon. The
same law holds with well cultivated flowers or with well tended live
stock. Even persons show the results of proper nourishment. It is just
so with silkworms. Cultivation tells. And not only does good care result
in larger caterpillars and finer cocoons, but also in more silk. So the
number of cocoons necessary to total a pound of raw silk vary. We cannot
compute that, except roughly. But we do estimate that broadly speaking
it takes about an acre of full grown mulberry trees to produce forty
pounds of raw silk."

"How interesting!" exclaimed Pierre. "I never thought of measuring silk
in mulberry trees."

"Not precisely in trees, but in their leaves," corrected Henri. "If you
were a scientific sericulturist, as many men are, you would know just
how many pounds of leaves you used each day; and you would work to
economize them so as to get the largest possible yield of silk from the
smallest possible outlay of leaves. All the big silk-growers manage
their business that way."

Pierre sighed.

"My mother said that too," he returned. "But you see, we do not know
enough to plan things so closely. However, it does not make much
difference, for we have plenty of mulberry trees. With the number of
silkworms we raise we never could use them all up. Years ago my father
set out our grove, and each season he has added new trees to it until
now it stretches from behind our house far down to the river."

"It would bring you in a lot of money if you ever wanted to sell it."

"Sell it!"

"Yes."

"But we'd never sell it!" retorted Pierre. "Pray, how should we live if
we gave up raising silkworms?"

Henri shrugged his shoulders.

"I only meant that your grove is valuable," he explained kindly. "Do not
forget that. Some time you might want money. I did not know whether you
realized how much a big grove of full grown mulberry trees is worth."

"I never thought anything about it," was Pierre's thoughtful reply. "Our
trees have never seemed to me anything I could sell. I thought only of
gathering the leaves for our own use."

"Well, just remember that your silk-house and your trees are worth a
good sum to a silk-grower. In these uncertain days of war one can never
tell when money may be needed. Of course you might not be able to get
such a good price for your property now, because France is poor, and
everything is selling for less than usual--everything except food.
Still, if you found the right customer you should be able to make a good
many francs out of your homestead."

"It isn't mine," Pierre answered gaily, as if suddenly coming to
himself. "It belongs half to my uncle and half to my father. What do you
suppose they would say when they came back from the war if they found I
had sold their mulberry grove and silk-house?"

"If you needed money for your mother and little sister they would
probably feel you had done wisely, even though it caused them
disappointment to see their cherished possessions in the hands of
others. And if," added the elder boy gravely, "anything happened to them
how glad they would be that those they loved were not left penniless."

"Anything happen to them!" Pierre's face paled. He had never, strangely
enough, pictured such a calamity. _His father! His uncle!_ True, other
men were injured fighting for France, thousands of them. But surely no
harm could come to _his_ family. Those he loved would return when peace
came; take up life where they had left it; and the home would once more
be united.

The boy glanced up to find Henri studying his face sympathetically.

"I did not mean to make you sad, little brother," declared the elder lad
softly. "The father and uncle will without doubt come again just as you
say. But must we not all be brave enough to look at things squarely and
with courage? Now that your father is gone to the war you have a man's
work to do. Surely you are going to meet life like a man, not as a
child. Forgive me if what I have said has hurt you."

With instant friendliness Pierre put out his hand.

"You have not hurt me," he returned quickly. "You have just set me to
thinking. I'm afraid I have been pretty thoughtless. My mother must have
had fears and have been worrying; yet so bravely has she kept it to
herself that she has shown Marie and me only her joyous side. I might
have helped her had I realized this before. She has always treated my
sister and me as children, keeping from us everything that was hard. But
I'll prove to her in future that I, at least, am no longer a child.
Thanks to you, Henri, I will go home to Bellerivre not only wiser about
silk-growing but wiser, I hope, about life."

"Perhaps, then, our talk has been fortunate," answered Henri, gazing
earnestly into the upturned face. "I hope so. And maybe some time you
will write to me and let me know how you are getting on. If I could ever
help you about your silk-raising I'd be glad to. There might be
something you'd like to ask. Henri St. Amant is my name, remember; and I
am always here at Pont-de-Saint-Michel."

With a cordial clasp of the hand the two boys parted.

Little did Pierre know what a loyal friend his chance acquaintance of
the morning was to prove.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER X

THE AWAKENING OF THE CHRYSALIS


When Pierre returned home he had much to tell his mother and Marie, you
may be sure, of his visit to Pont-de-Saint-Michel, and of the new friend
he had made at the Gaspard mills.

Now that the rush of handling the cocoons was over the days were not so
crowded, and although there was still plenty to keep the Bretton family
busy, Pierre and Marie resumed their normal routine of life, having
daily lessons with Monsieur le Curé, and aiding their mother in the
regular round of household tasks. There was a thorough cleaning of the
silk-house that it might be in readiness for the coming season; then
there was the money from the cocoons, the wonderful shining francs which
the family had earned together, to be invested. Part of them were laid
aside for living expenses; and part were spent in comforts for the loved
ones who were in the fighting line.

As she now had more leisure Madame Bretton went each day to the village
church to work with the other women at stripping and rolling bandages;
and when at home her deft fingers were never idle but flew to and fro at
her knitting. Marie, too, had learned to knit and although she
complained that her needles refused to _click_ as did her mother's, she
nevertheless was already able to make a sock and fashion its toe and
heel without help. As for Pierre, he split the wood, cared for the cow
and the goats, toiled in the field, brought hay from the hillsides, and
assumed much of the heavy work which his father and uncle had been
accustomed to do. A new manliness had crept into his bearing, causing
his mother to regard him with puzzled surprise, and not a little
satisfaction.

"You are a great comfort to me, Pierre," she would exclaim a score of
times a day.

Once the lad had flushed with pleasure at overhearing her say to
Monsieur le Curé:

"What should I do without my good son, my brave Pierre, to lean upon?"

Thus nearly two months sped past, and the moths within the cocoons that
had been laid aside for breeding began to hatch out and force themselves
through the small apertures they rent in their silken houses.

Marie viewed the first arrivals in consternation.

"They will fly all about the house and we shall lose them!" she cried.
"What can we do with them?"

But Pierre only laughed.

"Have no fear, little sister," he answered reassuringly. "Josef says
they will but flutter far enough to find their mates, and when their
eggs are laid they will die."

"Alas," sighed the girl, "what a wee time they have to enjoy the glory
of their new wings! Is it not sad, Mother?"

Madame Bretton regarded the child gravely for a moment; then she shook
her head and smiled into her little daughter's troubled eyes.

"It is not so sad as it seems," she answered gently. "The silkworm has
completed its work, and there is no need for it to live longer. It is so
with all of us. Each is put into the world with a task to finish, and
there can be no greater happiness than to know that that work--whatever
it was--has been faithfully accomplished. To me the lesson of these tiny
creatures' lives is an inspiration."

Marie smiled faintly, but was still unconvinced.

"But to have it all end just when they have got their wings, Mother!"

"But it does not end, chérie," was the quiet reply. "The moths leave
behind them their eggs, which hatch into another family of silkworms.
The work goes on, don't you see; it does not stop."

The girl's face brightened.

"It is so with children," continued her mother. "They live after their
parents are gone, and carry forward the family name and the good
principles their fathers and mothers have left in their keeping. You and
Pierre will, I hope, take out into the world all the good things your
father and I have attempted to teach you. Try to live always so that the
name you bear shall be honored. We have been poor French peasants but we
have never done anything that could cause you shame. And now in addition
to that knowledge you will have it ever to remember that your father was
a soldier of France, and when trouble came to our beloved land he gladly
offered his life to serve her."

A light of exaltation glowed in the woman's eyes.

Pierre, who had stolen unnoticed into the room, thought he had never
seen his mother so beautiful. There was something in her face that
brought to his mind the Jeanne d'Arc statue in the village square.

Softly he bent and kissed her cheek.

With the gesture Madame Bretton seemed to rouse herself, and her grave
mood instantly shifted into playfulness.

"Dear, dear!" she cried. "How serious we all are getting! It was your
moths, Pierre, that set me moralizing this way. Our work with them is
not yet done, either, for we must spread out the sheets of paper on
which they are to lay their eggs. Then we can move the pairs of moths
onto them."

She rose briskly.

"But how can we, Mother?" queried Marie. "When we touch them they will
surely fly away, won't they?"

"No, dear. After the moths have found their mates they can be moved very
easily. I have often seen your father take them gently by the wings and
put as many couples as he could on large sheets of white paper. There
they remained, and after their eggs were laid we removed the moths and
folding the papers of eggs put them away for next season's hatching. The
eggs were fastened so firmly to the paper that there was no danger of
losing any of them. Now where shall we spread the papers for our own
moths? They must be put well out of the sun and the strong light and
also where there is nothing to disturb the butterflies--no mice or
insects for example--or they will not lay eggs for us. Suppose we spread
our papers in Uncle Jacques' room. It is not in use now and it is on the
shady side of the house."

Rising, she crossed the floor and threw open the door of a vacant
bedroom.

Pierre noticed a shade of sadness flit across her face.

"Uncle Jacques would be glad to think we are using his room, Mother,"
said the boy quickly. "He has always been so interested in the
silkworms. Perhaps by the time the mulberry trees leaf again we shall
have peace, and he and Father will be once more at home helping us hatch
out these very eggs. Who knows?"

"Who knows indeed, dear? Only the good God who is watching over their
lives! It may be as you say. The spring may see them back again. We must
do our part to be ready for their coming."

From a drawer she brought out some large flat sheets of white paper and
spread them upon table, bureau, bed, and chairs. As the room was long
there was plenty of space.

[Illustration: "GO ON TIPTOE"]

"Now see how careful you can be in bringing in the moths. Go on tiptoe
and move gently."

Slowly the pairs of greenish white butterflies were transferred to the
papers. Scarcely one did more than flutter feebly.

"How long will it take before the eggs are laid, Mother?" inquired
Pierre.

"From twenty-four to thirty-six hours--usually not longer than that.
Each female moth will lay three or four hundred eggs."

"Shall we have room for so many?"

"Oh, yes," nodded Madame Bretton. "You recall how small they are--only
about the size of the head of a pin."

"In the meantime what are we going to give the moths to eat?" asked
Marie.

"Nothing. They are not hungry like silkworms. After they leave the
cocoon they eat no food, and they will live but a few days after their
eggs are laid. We must then gather up the sheets of eggs as quickly as
we can, for if they are left exposed to the light and air they will
hatch at once and then where should we be?"

"The entire crop would be lost!" gasped Pierre.

"Yes. Your father had a friend to whom that misfortune happened. He was
careless and left the newly laid eggs too long in the light, and when he
came back from the hills where he had gone on a few days' journey to cut
hay the tiny silkworms were hatched and he had nothing on which to feed
them. At that season the young mulberry leaves had gone by and, in fact,
the trees were nearly bare. It was a good lesson to him; but it was a
sad one, for the next spring he had to buy silkworm eggs, and they cost
him many francs."

"We will be more careful than that, won't we, Mother?" Marie said.

"I certainly hope so, for we can ill afford to waste our money."

And the Bretton family were more careful. Within a day or two the great
sheets of eggs were folded and put away in a dry, dark place where they
would be safe until the spring when, as the children insisted, Father
and Uncle Jacques might be at home again to share in the hatching and
direct the raising of the new crop of silkworms.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XI

PIERRE TAKES ANOTHER JOURNEY


During the next few weeks many a letter passed between Pierre and his
new friend Henri St. Amant; and by and by came an invitation for Pierre
to come again to Pont-de-Saint-Michel and spend the day visiting the
Gaspard throwing mills, where the raw silk was twisted and prepared for
weaving. The boy was all eagerness to go and his mother, too, favored
the trip, for Pierre had been working very steadily and now had few
pleasures. It seemed impossible to complete the never-ending round of
duties, although with uncomplaining zeal Pierre kept patiently at them.
Marie, it is true, helped with some of the lighter work; but she was
not strong enough to do much outside the house. As for Josef, faithful
as he was, the old man was aging rapidly and could do little more than
potter about the place and direct things. Therefore the cutting of trees
for fuel, the drawing of water, the building of fires all fell to
Pierre's lot.

What wonder that with such constant use the boy's strength was daily
increasing until he was becoming a veritable young giant? With no small
satisfaction he beheld the muscles of his arms tighten and stand out;
and when he swung his axe and brought down a sturdy sapling it was with
a glow of pleasure that he heard it crash to the ground. Certainly there
were compensations in hard work! Moreover was not every French boy who
was too young to serve in the army being a man at home? He was but doing
what all his friends were. Nevertheless the thought of a holiday did
fill him with anticipation. To get into something beside his workaday
clothes, and to mingle for an entire day amid new scenes, to say nothing
of seeing Henri St. Amant again--what a delight it would be!

Madame Bretton caught a reflection from his happiness and that nothing
should be left undone that should enhance the joy of her son's outing
she broke over her rules of strict frugality and packed a luncheon for
him, to which she added a few of the little luxuries which for a long
time the family had denied themselves.

And so in high spirits Pierre set forth for Pont-de-Saint-Michel. How
familiar every step of the journey seemed this time! And how good it was
to find Henri St. Amant awaiting him in the office of the Gaspard mills!

"I have been working over time all the last week, so they are letting me
have this morning to show you about the throwing mills," he explained,
his eyes shining into Pierre's still brighter ones. "And at noontime
when we have finished our round of the factory we can go down by the
river, and while we eat our luncheon we can talk together. Therefore
suppose we do not waste precious moments in visiting now, for we shall
scarcely have time to see all I want to show you before the noon whistle
blows."

Accordingly Pierre's box of lunch was stowed away in Henri's locker, and
speeding across the little bridge that connected the filature with the
throwing mills, the two boys entered the great factories.

"Before we go another step there is one question I must ask you," said
Pierre, stopping in the doorway. "I want you to tell me why the twisting
of raw silk into thread is called _throwing_."

"I'll try to explain it as well as I can, Pierre," answered Henri.
"Maybe you have stuck me on the very first question you've asked," he
added smiling. "All I know is that the operation of twisting, or
throwsting, the fibres of raw silk has come to be abbreviated into
throwing. The workmen are known as silk throwsters. It is an old trade.
At the beginning of the sixteenth century there were throwing mills at
Bologna which were so good that it is from them our present day
machinery has been copied and perfected. Usually the work is done on
commission--the manager, or throwster, receiving orders from weaving
mills for exactly the sort of thread they wish to use."

"Isn't it all alike?"

"No, indeed! It varies in size according to the number of threads in a
strand, and the number of twists and turns to the inch. Some materials
that are to be woven require heavy, loosely twisted thread; others, that
which is fine and tightly twisted. And in addition to these differences
some thread is not made from pure silk, or even from silk of the best
quality; raw silk which is imperfect can just as well be used for
certain purposes, or silk that is twisted with a strand of cotton or
some other filling. There are a great many qualities and kinds of thread
and each one has to be specified."

Pierre opened his eyes.

"Organzine, for example, is used for the warp of woven silk materials
and is generally spun from the best quality raw silk, the threads being
firm and strong. Tram, on the other hand, is silk of a second grade and
is composed of a greater number of fibres. Many of the mills
manufacturing woven silks prefer not to own throwing mills. Often their
plants are in large cities where land is expensive and they must
economize space; or the manufacturers estimate that they can get thread
thrown for them cheaper than they can do it themselves. Anyway, they
either send their own raw silk here to be thrown according to certain
specifications, or they tell us to get the raw silk ourselves and throw
it into the varieties required. If the firm sends its own silk it comes
to the throwster in bulk with an order to throw a certain proportion of
it into organzine of so many threads and twists; and the rest into tram
of specified size, the price being computed by the pound."

"I understand."

"The throwsting of silk is a great test of the reeling. If the reeling
has been well done, and the size of the strand is uniform, we have no
trouble; but if the reeling has been poor, and the gum not thoroughly
soaked out of the filament, the threads will snarl and break when they
are put on the machines. Frequently there is great loss from poorly
reeled cocoons, as I think I told you. And you must keep in mind that
the cocoon gives us two kinds of silk thread--the reeled silk, which is
of the best quality and is the continuous filament wound from the cocoon
requiring no textile machinery to prepare its fibres; and the spun silk,
which is made from the loose floss taken off before the cocoon is
reeled, or comes from cocoons that were too imperfect to be wound off by
the reelers. The latter variety must be treated much as are the fibres
from the cotton plant, or those of sheep's wool. By that I mean that the
short lengths have to be twisted and spun together before they can be
woven on a loom. Do you see the difference?"

Pierre nodded.

"Reeled silk comes direct from the cocoon, leaving the filatures on
spools, as you saw when you were here before. After that it is brought
to these mills and wound over into hanks or skeins of a specified
length--usually from 333 to 500 yards. The foreman told me that long ago
they had to employ one person to attend to every reel; but now with
modern machinery a single girl can watch twenty-four spools at once. One
of the interesting things is that all the finest reels used in France,
Italy, China, and Japan, come from America."

"But why don't the Americans reel their own raw silk, then, instead of
importing it?"

"They have no cocoons. My father says they tried raising silk in
America, but it was not successful. Mulberry trees will grow in some
parts of the country, but there is no cheap labor to be had over there
as here, and therefore it costs too much to feed and care for the
silkworms, and reel the raw silk. It is far less expensive for American
merchants to import the reeled silk for their looms. But they can beat
us at making machinery, if not at raising cocoons."

Henri chuckled.

"My father says," he went on, "that the Americans did not perfect the
reeling machines so much for our good as for their own. They used to get
all kinds of silk thread from the different parts of Europe; and it
could not be woven on their looms, which are finely adjusted and
require material of uniform size and strength. So they perfected
machinery for the preparation of silk thread, and practically insisted
that if they were to buy of us in Europe the material ordered must be
made as they wanted it. Most of the countries over here were glad enough
to comply with their demands, for the Americans are not only enormous
buyers, but their machines are much better than ours."

"Why couldn't they have cocoons shipped to them in bulk?" speculated
Pierre.

"They could not be easily packed, for they are not in form to ship. It
would be foolish. Besides, there is the same old problem of the lack of
cheap labor. You see, reeling silk is often slow work. Different breeds
of silkworm turn out, as you know, different qualities of thread. You
wouldn't believe how it varies as to size, cleanliness, lustre, and
perfection of filament. The Americans cannot afford to pay people to
classify all these varieties; nor stop their machinery at irregular
intervals to pick out the imperfections, or slugs, as we call them; also
the many knots must be tied by hand. It is fussy work. It would cost an
American manufacturer lots of money to get the sort of thread he wants.
You remember, too, how some of the best reelers that you saw when you
were here before sometimes had to take as many as five or more filaments
from different cocoons to get raw silk of a necessary coarseness; even
then, in spite of all their care, the skeins have to be sorted and
sometimes re-reeled to perfect the thread and make it acceptable to
American buyers. Our weavers over here would not begin to be so
particular; and in fact they often rate as _fair_ stuff that the Americans
consider _poor_, and refuse to take. You can readily see that all this
preparation of the material can be done for less price in Europe, where
workmen do not expect such high wages."

"What a lot of trouble the caterpillar makes people before his silk is
ready for the loom!" exclaimed Pierre laughing.

"I guess you'll think so when you see all we have to do to it," agreed
Henri. "I hope you won't mind the smell of the factory. It is horribly
stifling, and makes some of the men sick at first. It is the oil and
water in the silk. Silk must be damp for winding and spinning, otherwise
it breaks. It is never, even at best, thoroughly dry, for it has the
faculty of absorbing and holding moisture. Some time you'll learn more
about how they have to allow for the moisture in silk when they weigh
and ship it. Raw silk will often take up as much as thirty per cent. of
its weight in moisture without any one suspecting it. Therefore, in
order to be fair to the buyer who purchases his material by weight, they
have in all great silk centres what they call silk-conditioning houses,
where they test the goods to find out how much water is in it. This is
done by an apparatus known as a _desiccator_, which tells what the silk
would weigh if dry. To this estimate they add a definite percentage,
ordinarily about eleven per cent., to total what the raw silk would
weigh with a normal percentage of moisture. Every purchaser must expect
to pay for some moisture in his material--that is, pay more for it than
the silk itself actually weighs."

Pierre regarded Henri mischievously.

"There seems to be so much to learn that I do not believe I shall get
through this mill to-day. Maybe I'll have to spend the night here."

"I wish you could!" cried Henri. "Why didn't you plan to come home with
me and stay until to-morrow?"

"I couldn't be away over night, Henri," answered Pierre, "although it is
kind of you to ask me; there is so much that I have to do at home."

"Let us make haste then," Henri cried. "You have not seen anything yet,
and the morning is passing."

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XII

THE HOME-COMING


"There are about a dozen different processes which taken together are
known as throwing," explained Henri. "First the silk reeled from the
cocoons must be wound; then cleaned of all gum; picked--which means that
the uneven lumps must be removed; doubled, to make the thread stronger;
twisted, to make it still firmer; rewound; and finally reeled all over
again into silken yarn. Then it is ready to be put into any form
desired, in accordance with orders received from the weaving companies.
Sometimes it is made into what we call _singles_, one thread being given
a twist to make it stronger. Sometimes, as I told you, it is made into
_tram_, two or three threads being twisted lightly together just enough
to hold them; tram, as I said, is used for the filling or woof of woven
materials. Or perhaps _organzine_, which forms the warp threads of woven
goods and is composed of two or as many more singles as desired, is
ordered. Organzine can, of course, be made in any size specified, its
coarseness or fineness varying with the strength necessary; and it can
also be twisted any number of times to make it loose or tight. It must,
however, be twisted in the opposite direction from the twist given it
when the thread is made into singles or else that twist would come out
and do no good. And just here is an amusing point and one that nettles
the American buyers not a little. The moment raw silk is twisted even
once, transforming it into singles, the custom-house officials on the
other side of the water cease to regard it as a raw product although
nothing in the way of actual manufacture has taken place in its
preparation. The difference in its rating makes a difference in the duty
levied on it. Odd, isn't it?"

"How do you come to know all these things, Henri?" demanded Pierre. "You
seem to have studied everything there is to learn about silk."

"Indeed I haven't! But when you hear silk-making talked on every hand
you can't help picking up more or less information about it. Let me be
set down in a weaving mill, though, and I should be ignorant as a baby.
The problems of weaving are not in my line. Here in Pont-de-Saint-Michel
almost every one is employed in the Gaspard filature, or in the throwing
mills; and if not, the people raise silkworms. Since the men have been
called to the colors practically all the work of this big manufacturing
plant is being done by women, boys, and children. The few men we have
who are operating the heavier machines have either been sent home from
the front because they were wounded or else they are not strong enough
to fight. So you see, silk is the language of the whole village."

Henri gave a little shrug to his shoulders.

"It seems as if France must turn out enough silk for herself and all
the world," observed Pierre, motioning to the great bales heaped in a
near-by shipping-room.

"The output is, of course, very small now in comparison with what it
usually is," answered the elder boy. "The war has made a great
difference. Normally France does provide a good share of the world's
silk. But other countries do as much, if not more. For a long time Asia
sent most of the silk to the United States. Labor was very cheap in
China, as well as Canton and Shanghai. The natives, however, employed
very primitive methods in preparing their material and did it very
poorly, often winding the raw silk on bamboo sticks that roughened or
broke it. Frequently the thread would be a mass of dirt and slugs.
Merchants would not stand for this, and now American manufacturers have
gone to China and set up their own filatures equipped with American
machinery."

"How stupid of China to lose a chance like that for trade!"

"The Chinese are the slowest of all the big nations to adopt new ideas,
my father says; but they are waking up. They have been so clever in the
past, and the foremost to discover so many things that it is a pity
others should take from them the fruits of their learning. It is to
China, people say, that we owe the entire silk industry. And careless
preparation of their raw silk has not been their only or greatest
crime."

For a moment Henri paused.

"No. About 1870 the Chinese silk dealers got it through their heads that
what the American manufacturers demanded was a heavy silk thread. Now
instead of selecting more carefully the cocoons from which they wound
their raw silk and reeling it more perfectly, they set their ingenuity
to work to increase the weight of the fibre itself by loading it with
acetate of lead."

"I should think the Americans would have been pretty angry at that!"

"They were. They told the Chamber of Commerce at Shanghai that the
United States would refuse to buy silk of China unless this practice was
stopped. That scared the people, and for a while the adulteration of
the material ceased. But the reform was not for long. From time to time
the natives went back to their old tricks until by and by not only
America, but even the greater part of Europe, got all out of patience
with them. When they finally remedied the evil it was too late. Other
countries had learned the art of silk-raising and had stepped in and
snapped up most of the trade. My father says that now America, which is
the largest silk consumer of the world, buys only about a quarter of her
raw silk from China."

"So the evil-doer does not always prosper," laughed Pierre.

"Evidently not. In contrast to China's actions see what Japan did. That
nation was enterprising enough to cultivate silk and foster its reeling;
and when America sent the Japs machinery they set it up and soon had
tremendous filatures run by their own people. There were thousands of
factories where whole Japanese families were employed in reeling silk
from the cocoons. The Japanese raw silk, however, was not always free
from gum, and in time there was so much complaint about this from
America that conditioning houses were established at Yokohama where the
goods of each Jap merchant were examined and his personal trade-mark
attached to his wares so if they did not come up to the standard they
could be traced back to the owner who shipped them. Now more and more
Japanese silk is sold, and in the main it is good, although America
sometimes complains that it drops below the standard. Certainly no one
can begrudge Japan her prosperity, since she had the wit to grasp her
opportunity for commerce."

"Surely not."

"I think the trading of different nations one with another is all very
interesting, anyway," went on Henri. "Why, we are like one big
family--or ought to be! My father has no patience with war. He thinks we
should try and overlook the other's faults as we do at home, and live
together in peace. We all need each other, and the products peculiar to
each land. No one of us can get on without the rest, for as yet no one
country has been able to turn out everything its people require. It
takes every climate and every national characteristic to bring together
the produce of the globe. Besides, trade brings the different races
closer together. One of the greatest pities of this war is its
interference with commerce through which avenue we were all building up
bonds of universal friendship and sympathy. It stands to reason that we
understand the people of China or America better if we have dealings
with them and meet them sometimes, than if we always stay here in France
and read about them, doesn't it? And surely trade brings about greater
prosperity everywhere."

"It was to bring back to France that prosperity and peace that your
family and mine went to the war," murmured Pierre gently.

"Yes. And if this can be accomplished, and this frightful war be the
last war of the world it will be worth all that we have sacrificed,"
returned the older boy fervently. "But peace is a long time in coming."

He sighed.

"And prosperity will be still longer, I fear," added Pierre soberly.

There was an instant of tense silence.

Both boys were thinking.

"Speaking of commerce," resumed Henri, breaking in upon the serious
tenor of the moment and speaking in his former tone, "you doubtless know
that before the opening of the Suez Canal London was the great raw silk
centre of the world; now our own Marseilles leads, or did before this
fighting began. And we must not leave out Italy when talking of
silk-growing nations, for our neighbors, the Italians, have done as much
if not more silk exporting as has France. You see their climate is ideal
for raising silkworms; and when they are not beset by a plague that
destroys their crops, as it did between 1864 and 1878, the industry
prospers wonderfully with them. The thread from the Italian cocoons
seems to be naturally stronger than ours, and some of the best quality
raw silk in the world comes from small Italian villages. Then, too, of
course Italian labor is cheap. While in France we pay unskilled reeling
operatives from twenty to twenty-five cents a day Italian workmen doing
the same thing get only fifteen or twenty cents. There is not so much
American machinery used in Italy as here, however, and therefore some
merchants in the United States prefer French to Italian thread. But
generally speaking the very finest and highest priced silks made in
America are manufactured from French or Italian material. For many
purposes where less perfect thread is required the Americans use silk
from the East. It is cheaper, and manufacturers cannot afford the more
costly Italian and French thread for everything they make. Importing the
material in bulk, even compactly as it is shipped, is enormously
expensive. For you see there is always the chance of loss in the silk
business."

"Why?"

"Because although silk is necessary in the manufacture of certain
indispensable articles it is for the most part a luxury, and the demand
for it fluctuates. When times are hard people go without silk gowns and
silk stockings; nor do they expend their money in silk, satin, brocade,
or velvet hangings. The fashion, too, has much to do with the demand.
Some seasons women wear only satins and that throws back on the
manufacturers the silks they have on hand; or velvets are worn and the
satins have to be shelved. The vogue of certain colors also often causes
loss. It is a great lottery to be a silk merchant, my father says."

"Certainly the silkworm creates lots of business for people," declared
Pierre smiling.

"And the thread for weaving sarsnet--or sateen, taffeta, satin, and
velvet, as well as providing the fibres for sewing-silk is not all the
little caterpillar gives, either. Had you thought of the oiled silk,
used for a thousand and one purposes? Or of the silk-gut we use near the
hooks of our fish-lines?"

"I fish with just a string," replied Pierre.

Henri chuckled.

"You are not an expert fisherman then, Pierre," he answered. "Still, one
can land a very good fish with a pole and string; I have done it scores
of times. But professional fishermen have a bit of silk-gut to connect
the hook with the line. Not only is it very strong, but it is invisible
when under water. Most of the silk-gut is made in Italy or Spain, the
Spaniards surpassing all others at manufacturing it. Valencia is the
chief centre for the industry."

"And how is it made? Spun from silk fibres?"

"Not at all. You remember how, before the silkworm begins to spin, the
viscid secretion is stored in the two long ducts at each side of the
little creature's body. It is that material which it unites into a
single thread in the spinaret, you know. Well, before the worm has a
chance to spin, it is put into vinegar and this jellied silk is
extracted. It is first soaked in cold water and afterward in a caustic
solution so that its outer covering can be loosened and taken off. Then
the yellowish gum is dried in a shady place and bleached white by means
of sulphur fumes. You can see that it is expensive because so many
silkworms must be sacrificed, and because the thread produced is so
small. Why, I have read that it takes as many as twenty or thirty
thousand strings to make a pound."

Pierre gasped.

"No wonder I don't use silk-gut on my fish-line!" he exclaimed.

In the meantime the boys were passing on amid the stifling atmosphere
and whirling machines.

Suddenly the noon whistle blew and the busy wheels of the mill became
still.

Pierre and Henri were only too glad to emerge with the others from the
close, steamy air of the factory into the coolness of the outdoor world.
Down by the river's bank they unpacked their luncheon, a royal feast,
for Madame Bretton had sent enough food for both hungry boys. They were
in jubilant spirits.

"If I had a line with some silk-gut on it I might perhaps land a trout,"
said Pierre mischievously.

Henri shook his head.

"There are no fish in this stream, because the waste from the mill flows
into it. But some day in the spring, when I have a holiday, I can show
you a brook up in the hills where you can catch as many trout as you
like--silk-gut or no silk-gut," he said.

[Illustration: A ROYAL FEAST]

"There are fishing-holes at Bellerivre, too," retorted Pierre proudly.
"Why should you not make the next visit? You could then see my mother
and my sister Marie; and I could show you our silk-house."

The sounding of the whistle cut short further conversation and warned
the boys that their day together was at an end. Henri had to go back to
the mill and resume work at his machine from which the kindly foreman
had released him in the morning; and Pierre must take his train home.

But what a perfect day it had been!

As the engine hurried him toward Bellerivre Pierre busied himself
thinking how much he would have to tell his mother and Marie. The
village was reached almost before he realized it, and as he descended
from the train he was surprised to find Monsieur le Curé standing on the
platform to greet him.

The face of the priest was pale, and with apprehension Pierre made his
way toward him.

"My son!" was all the old man could say.

Instantly Pierre knew.

"You have bad news, Father," he cried quickly. "It is from the war. Tell
me! Do not fear. I am no longer a child."

Trembling, the kindly friend put a hand on the boy's shoulder.

"It came this morning--the message," he said. "I did not tell your
mother, but waited for you. There has been another great battle and----"

"My father?"

"He is missing, Pierre."

"And Uncle Jacques?"

"He will come no more, my son. He has given his life for France."

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIII

PIERRE TAKES THE HELM


Silently Pierre received the news. He neither trembled nor cried out. In
a vague way he realized that ever since that day long ago when Henri St.
Amant had first presented this possibility to his mind he had
unconsciously been bracing himself to meet with courage some such
emergency. And now the blow had fallen, and it was he who must break the
news to his mother, and be the strong prop on which she might lean. So
busy was he with these thoughts that he scarcely sensed the presence of
the faithful old priest who walked beside him. A score of confused
reveries were surging over the boy, and out of the chaos of grief,
reminiscence, and wonder, clearer ideas began to form themselves.

"We must sell the place," he declared, thinking aloud. "That will give
us some ready money to start on."

"I, too, think that might be well."

It was the quiet voice of Monsieur le Curé.

"Forgive me, Father," said the lad. "I had forgotten----"

"Do not reproach yourself, my son," replied the priest gently. "I did
not accompany you to be a burden in your sorrow--only that I might help
if I could."

He laid his hand on the boy's shoulder.

Pierre glanced into his eyes gratefully.

"About the selling of the home--you think it would be wise?" he asked.

"It seems to me now to be the best plan; but I should wish to consider
the matter more carefully before I gave a final decision. Advice must
not be given too hastily."

"You see," continued Pierre, still formulating his ideas, "the constant
care of a large crop of silkworms is too hard for my mother and Marie.
We have been able to manage it one season, and we might even do it two;
but to feel we must work as hard as that forever--it is not to be
thought of. If we are to take up sericulture permanently we must have
more help, and with the comparatively small margin of profit we are able
to make we are not in a position to do that. When my father and uncle
were at home it was a very different thing. Of course I have Josef, but
he can do only the lightest part of the work. I am glad to do my share,
more than my share; but I am only a boy, Father, and not so wise nor so
strong as my father was. Nor have I his knowledge. If our crop of
cocoons should fail some season either through my lack of skill or
because of some unavoidable calamity, we should be without money on
which to live. It would be terrible. The thought fills me with fear.
Help me, Father. You are older than I. Give me your counsel. Do you
think I am right, or only a coward?"

"To face the truth is never cowardly, Pierre," answered the priest. "You
reason well, my son. To take upon yourself in future the care you have
borne this year is far too much for a lad. It is a work for several
able-bodied men. That you and your mother and Marie have been able to do
it even this once is little short of a miracle. Of course you have each
thrown your entire heart and strength into it. Then, too, the season has
been ideal. No calamities have befallen your crop. Nevertheless
misfortunes do come. There are distempers that ravage the silkworms; bad
weather that wrecks the mulberry foliage; a thousand possible accidents
which at any moment may sweep away your income. Such a reverse would be
a dire catastrophe to you and your family." The curé paused
thoughtfully. "But if you were to sell the place," he went on a second
later, "what would you do? Surely the sum you would receive for it, even
if it was a generous one--a thing we can hardly expect in war
time--would not be sufficient for you all to live upon."

"I should not try to live here," answered Pierre promptly. "Long ago I
made up my mind that if anything befell my father and my uncle I would
persuade my mother and Marie to go with me to America."

"America!"

"It is not so far away."

"It is at the other side of the world!" asserted the simple priest.

Pierre laughed.

"No, indeed, Father. America is but a ship's journey away. Besides we
have relatives there. My mother's people are all at Paterson, New
Jersey. My plan would be to take part of the money we get for our home
and with it pay our passage to America. There I could find work at good
wages, and take care of my mother and sister."

Monsieur nodded silently.

"All this," continued Pierre, "is in case my father is not found. You
tell me he is missing. What does that mean, Father?"

"It may mean any one of several things," returned the curé. "Your father
may have been wounded and carried to some enemy's hospital; he may be a
prisoner in some war camp; or----"

The old man faltered.

"Or----" persisted Pierre. "Speak, Father. Do not be afraid."

"Or he may have fallen, and be lying unclaimed on some distant
battle-field."

"And what do you think is the chance of his being heard from?"

Unflinchingly the boy put the question.

"We cannot tell. He is in God's hands. I should wait for a time, my son.
Then if no message comes we must----"

Again the kindly voice wavered.

"We shall know he has been lost," put in Pierre in a whisper.

"I fear so."

Stillness fell between the two. Each was thinking.

"Then for the present I will not speak yet to my mother of selling the
home," said Pierre at last. "We will wait and hope for good news. It is
cruel to distress her unless we must. All may yet be well. Surely she
has grief enough as it is, for she was very fond of my uncle."

"You are a wise lad, Pierre," exclaimed the curé. "Do as you have said.
Console your mother with the hope of good tidings from the front. They
may come--who knows? And if not, her sorrows will at least come singly
and not all at once."

And thus it came about that through the great grief that overwhelmed the
Bretton home it was Pierre who was his mother's stay and comfort. He it
was who counseled hope and patience; he who took up the burden of acting
both as father and son.

But despite his courage the message so eagerly longed for did not come.
Days, weeks, months dragged on. The winter passed and faint hints of
spring began to steal into the landscape. The river, foaming with the
melted snows from far up the Pyrenees, dashed with deafening roar
through the mountain gorges. There was a new brilliancy in the noonday
sunshine.

To Pierre the worst had now become a certainty. His father would never
again be heard from. Somewhere in a camp or battle-field far from home
like a true son of France he had given up his life for his beloved
country. With sinking heart the boy faced this reality. He had not
sensed until now how subtly a secret anticipation that the facts might
prove otherwise had buoyed him up. But now hope was gone. How should he
tell his mother? How break in upon the dream she was cherishing, and
rudely force upon her the need for action?

How would she receive the plan for selling the home? To leave the spot
she loved so much would be an overpowering blow to her, for had she not
come as a bride to her present dwelling? Nay, more; she had been born in
Bellerivre and had never ventured beyond its confines. What would she
say to breaking every tie of her old life and setting forth from the
valley she loved to end her days in a strange and unknown country? For
Marie and himself it was well enough; they were young and their days
stretched far before them. But for his mother it would mean only the
severing of every familiar association.

Poor Pierre! Many an anxious hour did he spend wondering how he was to
present his plan so that it would not seem cruel.

Then one day he suddenly saw how useless had been his worry. It was his
mother herself who spoke and made the very suggestion he had been
hesitating to voice. How calmly and with what courage she did it! Ah,
Pierre need not have feared that she would fail to meet the great issue
when it came! Madame Bretton was too much of a woman for that. Instead
she had a long talk with her children and afterward a letter was
dispatched to the relatives in that mystic land, America. Soon a reply
came back. Madame Bretton had come of fine peasant stock, and her
brother had carried with him into the new land of which he had become a
citizen his native loyalty and bigness of heart. He now wrote urging his
sister and her fatherless children to come to Paterson and share his
home until such time as they could find work and settle themselves in
some convenient community.

And when this was agreed upon who should come forward to Pierre's aid
but Henri St. Amant! He it was who found at Pont-de-Saint-Michel a
customer ready to purchase for a good price the Bretton homestead, with
its well-equipped silk-house, and its grove of thriving mulberry trees.
Together with Pierre and the curé he worked out every detail of the
Brettons' departure, acting with a wisdom that was amazing in so young a
lad. The faithful Josef was to have a home with the old priest; nothing
was forgotten. Certainly Henri was a friend in need!

Therefore one sunny morning the Brettons started south across France for
the seaport from which, a week later, they were to set sail for that
untried world toward which many another hapless exile had journeyed, and
within whose borders the refuge of a home was offered.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIV

PIERRE AS A TEACHER


It appalled Pierre to see how much of the little fortune received from
the Bretton homestead had to be expended in reaching America. The money
which had seemed such a fabulous sum in Bellerivre evaporated in the new
land like the dew before the sun. Madame Bretton was too independent to
consent to live with her brother's family and be a burden to them longer
than was absolutely necessary, and therefore the renting and furnishing
of a simple apartment became unavoidable. After this expenditure but a
small bank account remained, and this the family agreed must not be cut
in upon; something must be left in case of illness or disaster. In
consequence the only way left to meet the expenses of daily living was
for all three of them to take positions in the great silk mills, where
so many hundreds of others were employed.

This was a great mortification to Pierre. Not that he was ashamed to
have his family rated as working people. Every one in the world, at
least those who were useful, worked in one way or another. His
humiliation lay in the fact that he who had thought himself able to be
the breadwinner for both mother and sister, was in reality nothing but
an unskilled laborer, whose services for the present commanded but
slight remuneration. The discovery was not only disconcerting but
galling. It was bad enough to have Marie enter the mill. But his
mother----! To think of his mother, at her age, becoming a mill
operative!

If the step was as repugnant to Madame Bretton as to Pierre she at least
made light of it. They must all live, she cheerily explained, and living
in America was a far different problem from what it had been in the
green valley of Bellerivre. And after all they were but doing what many
another household in Paterson was doing. Why should it be any less
dignified for her to labor in a mill than at raising silkworms? Besides,
it might not be for long. When Marie and Pierre learned and became more
expert maybe they would earn enough so that she could retire and stay
within doors like a lady of fortune, keeping the home and--she jestingly
added--dressing in some of the very silk she had helped to make. Thus
with affectionate banter Pierre's objections were quieted if not
overcome, and through the influence of Mr. Gautier, Madame Bretton's
brother, who was a superintendent in one of the larger mills of the
plant, good positions were found for the entire family.

Fortunately both Marie and Pierre were of an age to pass the Child Labor
Laws of the State, an important detail of which Pierre had previously
been in ignorance. Many children who applied for places, he learned,
were constantly being turned away because they were too young; and
because much of the work formerly done by them was now performed by
women or girls.

Among the toilers in the vast manufactory almost every country was
represented. There were more Italians than any other nationality; and
ranking after them came Germans, Irish, and Dutch, with a scattering of
French and Poles. It made the Brettons feel quite at home to find
themselves among some of their own countrymen.

But what a different place Paterson was from the fertile valley they had
left behind them! There were the great blackened factories--a city in
themselves--with their tall chimneys and whirring wheels, which one came
to hear almost in one's sleep. And there were the homes huddled closely
together into which humanity was herded. Even the blue of the sky was
dimmed by a veil of heavy smoke. What wonder that it took all the
Brettons' courage to be cheerful under such conditions; or what marvel
that many a time they sighed in secret for that far-away land where they
had been born? But there must be no looking backward. Resolutely they
crushed the homesickness that surged up within them, and began to learn
all they could of this strange new country which in future was to be
their home.

Paterson, their Uncle Adolph explained, had become the greatest silk
centre of the United States, because it was so near New York, the city
where most of the raw silk from European ports was received.

"But I do not understand why the factories are not built in New York
itself," remarked Pierre.

"Taxes are too high and land is too expensive to afford the necessary
area for such great mills as these," explained his uncle. "Small silk
goods which can be made in little space are manufactured in New York; in
fact, the headquarters for American laces, fringes, trimmings, and
tassels is there. To have an ideal location factories must be so
situated as to be near a large city which will assure the selling of
goods, their shipment, and the chance to secure plenty of labor for the
mills. Moreover, they must be built where, as I said, land is
comparatively low priced and plentiful, and the taxes moderate. Such a
combination is not easy to find. It explains why so many cities have in
them the kinds of manufactures they have. It is an interesting study to
follow out. Here in New Jersey, for example, we have throwing and
spinning mills, large dyeing establishments, and we weave the finest of
ribbons as well as broad goods."

"What do you mean by broad goods?"

"The term applies to dress materials and the silks that are sold in the
shops by the yard," answered his uncle.

"Pennsylvania, too, is a large silk-making community," went on Mr.
Gautier, "because fuel is cheap in that State; and because, since so
many of the Polish, Irish, and German men work in the mines silk mills
afford a livelihood for the great numbers of unemployed women, girls,
and young boys in their families. In fact the State of Pennsylvania
often gives to companies that will come into the mining districts and
put up silk mills not only the land for their factories, but also sites
for the homes of their employees. That is one thing that has brought so
many silk mills into Pennsylvania. Quantities of ribbons and broad silks
are made there, as well as velvets and upholstery goods. It is a great
throwing and spinning centre."

"Tell me something about the other States," demanded Pierre, his eyes
wide open with interest.

"Well, there is Connecticut--that is a large silk-making district. About
two-thirds of the machine twist is manufactured there; and they turn out
both narrow and broad goods--silks, velvets, plushes. At South
Manchester some of the finest and most artistic American silks are made.
Massachusetts stands at the front in the manufacture of sewing-silks,
which require finely equipped plants and much heavy machinery;
embroidery silks, wash-silks, and trimmings are made there, too."

Mr. Gautier paused a moment.

"Then there is Rhode Island," he continued. "That is a silk
manufacturing State also, although it does not turn out anywhere near so
much material as do the others that I have mentioned. If you want to be
in the largest silk-making spot in America Paterson is the right place,"
he added, smiling down at his nephew. "There is no end of chance for a
bright boy to rise in these mills. But you must be quick and work hard.
You seem to be able to do both those things, Pierre. Just go to it, my
boy, and you need not fear but you will be earning good wages soon."

In spite of his French ancestry Monsieur Gautier had caught the American
slang.

Pierre glanced up into his face.

"I shall do my best for my mother's sake, if for no other," he replied.

"Well, you'll certainly have your chance to work here," laughed his
uncle. "There is variety enough to please you, too. We have throwing
mills; a place where we dye silk in the skein; a winding and weaving
plant; another plant for dyeing goods in the piece; and a big printing
and finishing plant. If you do not find something to suit you by the
time you have worked through all these it will be your own fault. Of
course women have the monopoly of certain parts of the work; but there
is plenty left to go 'round, so do not worry."

[Illustration: "I SHALL DO MY BEST"]

With a twinkle in his eye Monsieur Gautier went into his office.

During the weeks that followed many new experiences did the Bretton
family have, and much did they learn of silk-making. From every source
available they gleaned information, for being versed in silk-raising
they were eager to know all they could of the rest of the process,
especially Pierre. He found there were hand-looms for the making of
finer varieties of silks which were manufactured in smaller quantities
and were of individual design. On American power-looms, which were
surprisingly light of construction and were handled with great ease,
most of the other goods were made. It was remarkable that a machine
costing comparatively little and so simple to operate should be so
accurate in weave, and turn out so much work. As for the old Jacquard
loom that in a former day had transformed the industrial world--it had
been so altered and improved as to be hardly recognizable. Formerly, he
learned, looms of Swiss and German manufacture had been employed in
America; but these had speedily given place to the American high-power
automatic loom, especially for the making of ribbons which were woven
the same way as were broad goods, except that the shuttle was not a
flying but a fixed one, that moved from side to side like a
sewing-machine. So clever was the construction of these looms that they
seemed to be little short of thinking creatures; when plain ribbon was
to be turned out the operatives who were paid so much for the _cut_ or
ten yard piece, had little to do beyond seeing that there was plenty of
thread on the spools, and that the ends were tied when broken.

For the more expensive and elaborate ribbons, however, more involved
machinery was required. One device after another had been added to
eliminate human labor, but even then these machines needed more persons
to operate them. As a result of their complexity the speed of these
intricate machines was less, and in consequence the price of making the
goods was increased. Nevertheless there was a vast improvement over past
conditions, when all overshot and embroidered effects had to be worked
out on hand-looms. It enabled Americans to turn now to home manufacture
for their ribbons. It was nevertheless true, Mr. Gautier explained, that
much of the home market was created by the high tariff on the French
ribbons still manufactured on hand-looms; these continued to be of
choice design and of greater variety of pattern than were the American
goods that had to be turned out in larger quantities on power-looms.
Were it not that the American ribbons could be bought cheaper the French
ones would probably, in many cases, be preferred.

About one half of the total silk output of America, Pierre was told, was
in dress goods. Many of these were rich in quality, but many were not.
The American women eagerly followed the fashions and were, as a class,
far more concerned about having silk of a fashionable color than
possessing that which would wear a long time. In fact, they did not wish
materials to wear too long. Most of them were fairly well-to-do and were
able to discard a garment when a passing fancy had been gratified, and
after a thing was passé they would rather toss it aside than wear it
out. In consequence shopkeepers, who studied the market as if it were a
thermometer, refused to cumber their counters with expensive goods which
must only be shelved after their color or design was out of date. Such
conditions had created an American market for cheap silks such as was
unknown in Europe where quality was a far greater factor in the sale of
silk materials. In the United States these flimsy dress goods could be
turned out with little expense on American power-looms by unskilled
workmen, whereas in other countries experienced men were needed to make
them.

As for the soft satins or messalines, they were made almost entirely in
Europe because the cost of American labor was too great for them to be
produced here. The operatives making them were paid by the piece and the
process of weaving was a slow one. The heavy brocades and tapestries for
upholstery were usually of such elaborate design and so interwoven with
gold thread that to manufacture them on power-looms was practically
impossible; and as hand-looms were required European hand-loom work was
cheaper than American.

"The flaw in our power-loom is that double threads cannot be handled,"
explained Mr. Gautier to Pierre. "Any goods requiring such treatment
must of necessity be made on hand-looms."

So little by little Pierre's knowledge grew.

Military and upholstery trimmings, he ascertained, could be turned out
in large quantities on power-looms; but dress and cloak trimmings, which
were more elaborate, were made in America only in comparatively small
quantities and again because of their intricate patterns and gold
threads Europe could produce them cheaper on hand-looms. If, however,
the pattern desired was sufficiently simple, and a large enough quantity
of it was ordered to make it pay the manufacturer to bother with setting
it up it could be made on the American power-loom. Fancy braids were
made chiefly in Europe from the floss or spun silk taken from the
outside of the cocoon; but plain braids, Pierre was interested to know,
were made in America as cheaply and well as in Europe, most of them
being manufactured from artificial silk.

It was a great surprise to Pierre to find there was such a thing as
artificial silk.

"I knew there were artificial flowers and artificial--well, almost
everything," laughed Pierre to his mother. "But artificial silk!"

He gasped.

"What is it made of, Pierre?" questioned Madame Bretton, who had come to
regard with wonder the fund of information her big son was acquiring.

"The man who told me about it said that cotton and the pulp from soft
wood were used for one sort," he answered. "Another kind comes from
dissolving cellulose in chemicals, and forcing this mixture through long
tubes into some sort of a bath that makes the material come out in
threads; these threads can then be wound, spun, washed, soaked, and
dyed. Here in America most of the artificial silk which, by the way, is
known as viscose, has cellulose in some form as its base, afterward
being treated with different combinations of chemicals."

"What shall we do with you, Pierre, if you learn so much?" questioned
Madame Bretton mischievously.

Pierre smiled.

"I'm going to learn every bit I can, so that I may soon work up to
earning lots of money," he said. "Then you and Marie can leave the
mills, and I can take care of you."

"You are a good son," his mother answered with an odd little catch in
her voice. "But do not be distressed because we are in the mills. Indeed
we are very happy there."

"You would make the best of anything you had to do, Mother; you're that
sort," replied the boy, taking her hand in his. "But I know well it is
hard for you to work at a machine all day when you have never been
accustomed to it, and I do not mean you shall do it one moment longer
than I can help."

"There, there, son----" his mother's eyes filled, and to change the
subject she said briskly:

"And these artificial silks of which you were telling me--are they good
for anything else but for making braids?"

"Yes, indeed. Nitro and viscose silks are more brilliant and lustrous
than are real silks. They have no such soft feeling, however. They feel
more like the harsh, loaded silks made from thread which has been
chemically weighted. But they are coming into demand more and more for
such purposes as the warp and filling of various sorts of fabrics, rugs,
silk stockings, and upholstery materials. Here in this country, where
electricity is in general use, artificial silk is a blessing, for it
serves as a substitute in the insulating of electric light wires, and
the manufacture of mantles for lights."

"How clever people were to find anything that could be used instead of
the real, carefully nurtured cocoon silk," mused his mother.

"I know it. I suppose chemists worked at the problem a long time before
they solved it. That is the way most of the great discoveries were made.
Still, the wild silk made by the moths of India is not carefully grown.
From it the Oriental Tussah silk is made; then there is Eria silk, also
an uncultivated product from India; the Fagara silk from China; and the
Yamamai silk from Japan, which is next to domestic silk in value. All
these are manufactured from silk spun by silkworms that have had no
care. The foreman was telling me about it the other day."

There was a pause.

"What did you mean, Pierre, when you spoke of loaded silk?" questioned
his mother. "I have heard the term used many times, but I have never
understood it."

Pierre looked at her with amusement.

"Anybody would think that I was your schoolteacher, Mother mine!" he
returned. "I feel very silly telling you things when you are so much
older and wiser than I."

"I certainly am older; and I used to be a little wiser," replied his
mother humorously, "but I shall not be so long. You see, dear, I never
had much education and I am now too old to learn. But you are
accumulating knowledge every day. You are like a sponge, Pierre. You
seem to soak up every bit of information that you hear."

"I must get my schooling this way, Mother, since I can secure it in no
other," answered the boy soberly. "And perhaps it is a good way after
all, for since I am eager to know something I try and remember every
scrap I hear. I may want to use it later."

"Your father used to say that no knowledge comes amiss," was his
mother's soft answer. "How proud your father would be of you, Pierre!"

"But I must know more, and more, and still more, Mother, before I can
get to the top!" exclaimed the boy eagerly. "And now to tell you of
weighted silks. You see, in dyeing silk the material shrinks and loses
about a quarter of its weight. Manufacturers found that by adding
chemicals, or sugar and glucose during the boiling off, they could make
up for this loss. That is how the custom started. Black silks, which
shrunk the most, were treated first. Later the practice spread to
colored, and even to white silks. Now, alas, the evil seems to have come
to stay. Salts of tin in varying degrees are used in the dyeing of most
silks, and the result is that the material becomes crisp and harsh so
that it cracks when folded, and does not wear long."

"What a pity!"

"Yes. And yet perhaps the Americans, who are none too anxious to wear
out their old clothes, are quite as well satisfied," chuckled Pierre.

"In what an endless number of ways silk is used!" reflected Madame
Bretton.

"Yes. And when you have done with the ribbons, and trimmings, and
braids, and silks, and upholstery brocades, and satins, think of the
velvets and plushes that can now be made in this country in all sorts of
fancy designs on power-looms instead of on hand-looms as formerly. Of
course it is still cheaper to import certain kinds of velvets and
plushes; but a great many of them are made here, as are the larger
proportion of the velvet ribbons which are easily turned out on
high-power machines."

"What about silk hosiery and underwear?" questioned his mother, much
interested.

"Silk stockings and silk gloves, Uncle Adolph says, are a big American
product. There is little finishing to them except putting the buttons on
the gloves. In fact I read the other day that the silk used for them was
only slightly adulterated, and that they were made even better than in
Europe. But making underwear seems to be another story. Each garment
manufactured has to be shaped as it is made, and therefore the process
is a special one and the knitting is slow. This results in expensive
labor, and a very limited output. After the seams are finished, the
buttons on, the fancy braid and facings in place, and the final
trimmings stitched where they belong, the profit is small. All this can
be done much cheaper in Europe, and were it not for the protection of a
high tariff, Uncle Adolph says, Americans would buy all such goods
abroad. The tariff protects the American silk industry at every turn. I
don't know where the United States would be without it! Then you must
remember that after this silk underwear is done it is not sold to
individual customers in any considerable quantity. Instead it retails
piece by piece, and therefore every piece has to be folded and packed
separately. No wonder such things are expensive here!"

"I never realized before how interesting the problems of making things
were," said Madame Bretton, glancing up at Pierre.

"It is all fascinating when you take it as a whole. But if you just do
one part of the work over and over and never connect it with the entire
process, it is tiresome enough. Every workman should consider himself a
link in the big chain, and try to make himself familiar with the other
links. Then he will feel as if he is really doing something, and not
just pegging away day after day as if he were a machine. That is why I
want to learn all I can about silk as a complete industry. It makes
winding bobbins and reeling thread a more important matter. Some firms,
Uncle Adolph says, have moving picture lectures and by means of them
explain to their employees the entire process of their particular
industry so they will be more intelligent about what they are doing. I
think that is a fine thing. Nobody likes to do some uninteresting thing
over and over, week after week and year after year, unless he
understands what he is doing. Even the money you earn doesn't help to
make your work less monotonous. How can employers expect their men to
have any ambition, or any desire to turn out flawless products unless
they realize that each detail of a process makes the perfect whole? I
mean to know every step of the road I am traveling so when I get to the
top----"

"So when you get to the top you can make silk all by yourself,"
interrupted his mother, completing the sentence with a smile.

"Well, I'm going to know how, anyway," nodded Pierre. "And I wish to
learn not only of silks and velvets, but laces, too. Laces are fussy,
difficult, and expensive to make. I want to find out all about them. I
know they have to have the strongest and most perfect thread. In Europe
such goods are made either by hand, or on hand-looms. It is a slow
process at best. But the power machines here, slowly as they are forced
to work, can of course turn out lace much faster than it can be made in
Europe on hand-looms. Consequently the commoner kinds of laces are made
in this country, used, and worn out while they are in fashion; for the
Americans shift their fashions in laces quite as fast as they do their
fashions in silks. Before a certain design can be sent to Europe,
manufactured, and sent back again the vogue for that particular pattern
will have ceased and Americans will be wearing something else. That is
what saves the lace trade for America. It is the same with the making of
lace veils."

"There seems to be no keeping up with these Americans," laughed Madame
Bretton. "Certainly there is no keeping up with their cost of living!"

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XV

THE GREAT SURPRISE


During the next few months the Bretton family prospered in their careers
in the Paterson mills. Madame Bretton, whose deftness and care in
handling material was quickly recognized, was promoted to a position
much better suited to her age and refinement, and also one that was more
lucrative. In addition Marie, skilful too of touch, was put in the
labeling department. But with undaunted spirit Pierre still drudged at
the heavier work of the mill, mastering one step after another of its
dull processes. To another boy the slow climb to the top of the ladder
might have been tedious; but to the French lad, with eyes fixed
constantly on the great industry of silk-making as a whole, every part
in the ingenious art became interesting.

Despite the fact that Mr. Gautier was his uncle the boy received no
favors. In such a vast group of factories one superintendent had small
jurisdiction over individual workers; nor was Mr. Gautier a man to
promote unjustly. Whatever progress Pierre made he made on his own
merits. On entering the mills he had been employed at _lacing_, one of
the simpler tasks usually given to beginners. His duty was to run short
threads in and out through the skeins of silk in order to divide them
into four parts, and prevent them from becoming tangled in the dyeing.
Many young boys and girls known as _lacers_ were set at this task for
the first month or two. But Pierre did not remain a lacer. He went on to
being a learner in other departments.

He saw how the raw silk which arrived at the factories in bales ranging
from eighty to a hundred twisted skeins were weighed; sorted as to
quality; soaked in oil so that the gum might be extracted, and the ends
freed for winding. He witnessed the drying, or rather the partial
drying, of the silk. All this was an old story, for he had seen every
step of the process before when at the Gaspard throwing mills. Then
followed the winding on big, three-inch spools; and the first spinning.
Afterward if the thread was for tram it went direct to the doublers, to
be made stronger; but if it was for organzine it was spun again after
leaving the doubling frames, and was given a much tighter twisting. It
was then reeled into skeins again, this form being found the most
convenient one for dyeing. The tying, or lacing of these skeins, had
been Pierre's work. The skeins after being laced were then bundled, or
packed tightly, to be sent to the dye-house. This finished the work of
the throwing mills and Pierre was interested to see that the process was
practically the same in America as in France.

But from the time the dyed silk came back to the weaving mills
everything was new. The weaving of broad goods such as dress materials,
mufflers, handkerchiefs, and necktie silks took place on the broad
looms; while narrow goods such as ribbons were woven on the narrow
looms. It was a long time, alas, ere Pierre came to understand the
complex weaving machinery; and before he half comprehended it a most
unexpected happening befell the Bretton family.

It was heralded by a letter from far-away Bellerivre--a letter from
Monsieur le Curé; and before the amazing tidings in the missive could be
assimilated another letter--a feeble scrawl--followed.

Monsieur Bretton lived!

The beloved father they had given up as lost was actually alive!

He had been wounded, captured, and kept a prisoner in a hostile camp
from which it was impossible to communicate with his family. As soon as
he was able he had been forced to work for his captors, and there he had
remained cut off from all knowledge of his family or friends. By and by
he had succeeded in escaping and reaching his own lines, only to be shot
down in the next battle in which he had taken part. Then had followed a
long illness in a French hospital where under the care of the kind
sisters he had hovered 'twixt life and death. There had been no letters
home because he had been too delirious to tell his nurses where to
write. At length out of the chaos had come sanity, and now because his
wounds were such that he could do no more fighting he had come home to
Bellerivre. Monsieur le Curé and Josef were nursing him, and he hoped to
join his dear ones in their new home as soon as he was able.

It was a wonderful story!

Some day, the doctor said, he would regain his strength and be well
enough to do some simple work so that he could still earn a livelihood
and not be a burden to his family.

How good the tidings were! How almost unbelievable!

Over and over again the jubilant Brettons rehearsed the tale and framed
new plans for the future. It took all Madame Bretton's resistance not to
draw from the bank the treasured nest-egg still reposing there and go
home to France to nurse her husband back to life. But Monsieur le Curé
bade her not to come. The invalid was in good hands and progressing
rapidly. Soon she might send money for the journey, and the kind priest
himself would see the wounded Frenchman aboard a ship that would carry
him to America. It was the wisest plan. Both he and Monsieur Bretton
thought so. Then when peace was restored to the weary world, and the
family had sufficient money they might all come back together to
Bellerivre, never again to leave its sunny valley.

Thus argued the old priest.

But that day never came.

Pierre rose to a fine position at Paterson, enabling him to establish a
pretty home there in which his father and mother lived in comfort.
Marie, in the meantime, married an American and settled next door.

Thus the new land, once but a haven to a tempest-tossed household,
became the permanent dwelling place of the Bretton family.
Affectionately they remembered the green valley of Bellerivre; and the
friendship of the old priest and the faithful Josef. Tenderly they
spoke of their neighbors in the old home and ever loyally they loved La
Belle France, the soil that had given them birth.

But the spell of America was upon them. They did not wish to go back.

The golden path of opportunity lay in the country of their adoption and
in exchange for all that it was giving them they resolved to return a
devoted citizenship.

And so between the two great sister Republics another bond was
established--a humble bond to be sure, but one that linked in loving
ties the old world and the new; and daily spanned the distance between
them with many a kindly thought, and a speeding message of good-will.




    The Stories in this Series are:

    THE STORY OF COTTON
    THE STORY OF GOLD AND SILVER
    THE STORY OF LUMBER
    THE STORY OF WOOL
    THE STORY OF IRON
    THE STORY OF LEATHER
    THE STORY OF GLASS
    THE STORY OF SUGAR
    THE STORY OF SILK
    THE STORY OF PORCELAIN





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of Silk, by Sara Ware Bassett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF SILK ***

***** This file should be named 25025-8.txt or 25025-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/0/2/25025/

Produced by La Monte H.P. Yarroll and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
